ILIA NORMALIZED LEGAL TEXT

Document ID: icj-arrest-warrant-2002
Title: Arrest Warrant of 11 April 2000 (Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Belgium) Judgment
Chinese title: 2000年4月11日逮捕令案判决
Issuing body: International Court of Justice
Official source: https://www.icj-cij.org/sites/default/files/case-related/121/121-20020214-JUD-01-00-EN.pdf
Database version: public-international-law-v1.0.1-normalized-2026.09.24

NOTICE
This is an ILIA-generated normalized text for offline legal research.
It is not an official edition. Source-edition page markers are retained
only as factual verification locators. Verify quotations against the
official source linked above.

========================================================================

[Source edition page 7]

1. On 17 October 2000 the Democratic Republic c~fth e Congo (hereinafter
referred to as "the Congo") filed in the Registry of !.he Court an Application
instituting proceedings against the Kingdom of Belgi~~(mhe reinafter referred to
as "Belgium") in respect of a dispute concerning an 'international arrest warrant issued on 11 April 2000 by a Belgian investigating judge . . . against the
Minister for Foreign Affairs in office of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Abdulaye Yerodia Ndombasi".
In that Application the Congo contended that Iielgium had violated the
"principle that a State may not exercise its authority on the territory of another
State", the "principle of sovereign equality among al1 Members of the United
Nations, as laid dowii in Article 2, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United
Nations", as well as "the diplomatic immunity of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of a sovereign State, as recognized by the jurisprudence of the Court
and following from Article 41, paragraph 2, of the Vienna Convention of
18 April 1961 on Diplomatic Relations".
In order to found the Court's jurisdiction the Coiigo invoked in the aforementioned Application the fact that "Belgium ha[d] a(:cepted the jurisdiction of
the Court and, in so Far as may be required, the [aforementioned] Application
signifie[d] acceptance of that jurisdiction by the De:nocratic Republic of the
Congo".
2. Pursuant to Article 40, paragraph 2, of the Starute, the Application was
forthwith communicated to the Government of Belgiiim by the Registrar; and,
in accordance with paragraph 3 of that Article, al1 States entitled to appear
before the Court were notified of the Application.
3. Since the Court included upon the Bench no jiidge of the nationality of
either of the Parties, each Party proceeded to exercise the right conferred by
Article 31, paragraph 3, of the Statute to choose a judge ad hoc to sit in the
case; the Congo chose Mr. Sayeman Bula-Bula, and Belgium Ms Christine Van den Wyngaert.
4. On 17 October 2000, the day on which the P pplication was filed, the
Government of the Congo also filed in the Registry of the Court a request for
the indication of a provisional measure based on AI ticle 41 of the Statute of
the Court. At the hearings on that request, Belgium, l'or its part, asked that the
case be removed froni the List.
By Order of 8 December 2000 the Court, on the ont: hand, rejected Belgium's
request that the case be removed from the List and, c,n the other, held that the
circumstances, as they then presented themselves to tl-e Court, were not such as
to require the exercisi: of its power under Article 41 of the Statute to indicate
provisional measures. In the same Order, the Cour. also held that "it [was]
desirable that the issues before the Court should be d':termined as soon as possible" and that "it [was] therefore appropriate to ensiire that a decision on the
Congo's Application be reached with al1 expedition"
5. By Order of 1:3 December 2000, the President of the Court, taking
account of the agreement of the Parties as expresse1 at a meeting held with
their Agents on 8 December 2000, fixed time-limits for the filing of a Memorial
by the Congo and of a Counter-Memorial by Belgiun, addressing both issues
of jurisdiction and admissibility and the merits. By Orders of 14 March 2001
and 12 April 2001, thi:se time-limits, taking account of the reasons given by the
Congo and the agreement of the Parties, were successively extended. The
Memorial of the Corigo was filed on 16 May 2001 within the time-limit thus
finally prescribed.
6. By Order of 27 .rune 2001, the Court, on the oni hand, rejected a request

[Source edition page 8]

by Belgium for authorization, in derogation from th: previous Orders of the
President of the Court, to submit preliminary objecti sns involving suspension
of the proceedings on the merits and, on the other, exiended the time-limit prescribed in the Order of 12 April 2001 for the filing by Belgium of a Counter-
Memorial addressing both questions of jurisdiction and admissibility and the
merits. The Counter-Memorial of Belgium was filecl on 28 September 2001
within the time-limit thus extended.
7. Pursuant to Article 53, paragraph 2, of the Rulcs, the Court, after ascertaining the views of the Parties, decided that copies oi'the pleadings and documents annexed would be made available to the public it the opening of the oral
proceedings.
8. Public hearings vtere held from 15 to 19 October 2001, at which the Court
heard the oral arguments and replies of:
For tlîe Congo: H.E Mr. Jacques Masangu-a-Mwanza,
H.E Mr. Ngele Masudi,
Maître Kosisaka Kombe,
Mr. François Rigaux,
Ms IMonique Chemillier-Gendreau,
Mr. Pierre d'Argent.
For Belgiunî: Mr. Jan Devadder,
Mr. Daniel Bethlehem,
Mr. Eric David.
9. At the hearings, Members of the Court put cuestions to Belgium, to
which replies were given orally or in writing, in accsrdance with Article 61,
paragraph 4, of the Rules of Court. The Congo provided its written comments
on the reply that was given in writing to one of the:e questions, pursuant to
Article 72 of the Rules of Court.
10. In its Application, the Congo formulated the decision requested in the
following terms :
"The Court is requested to declare that the Kingdom of Belgium shall
annul the international arrest warrant issued on 1 I April2000 by a Belgian
investigating jud,ge, Mr. Vandermeersch, of tkie Brussels Tribunal de
première instance against the Minister for Foreign Affairs in office of the
Democratic Repiiblic of the Congo, Mr. Abdu aye Yerodia Ndombasi,
seeking his provisional detention pending a requc st for extradition to Belgium for alleged crimes constituting 'serious vislations of international
humanitarian law', that warrant having been circulated by the judge to al1
States, including ithe Democratic Republic of the Congo, which received it
on 12 July 2000."
11. In the course of the written proceedings, the fo lowing submissions were
presented by the Parties:
On hehalf' of' the Governrnetzt of' tlze Congo.
in the Memorial :
"In light of the facts and arguments set out al)ove, the Government of
the Democratic R.epublic of the Congo requests ihe Court to adjudge and
declare that :

[Source edition page 9]

1. by issuing and internationally circulating the rrest warrant of 11 April
2000 against Mr. Abdulaye Yerodia Ndombasi, Belgium committed a
violation in regard to the DRC of the rule of customary international
law concerning the absolute inviolability and immunity from criminal
process of inciumbent foreign ministers;
2. a forma1 finding by the Court of the unlawfiilness of that act constitutes an appropriate form of satisfaction, providing reparation for the
consequent moral injury to the DRC;
3. the violation o'f international law underlying tlie issue and international
circulation of the arrest warrant of 11 April 2 000 precludes any State,
including Belgium, from executing it;
4. Belgium shall be required to recall and cantel the arrest warrant of
11 April 2000 and to inform the foreign auth ~ritiesto whom the warrant was circulated that, following the Coitrt's Judgment, Belgium
renounces its request for their CO-operationi l executing the unlawful
warrant."
of'
On behaif qf the Governnlent Brlgiurn,
in the Counter-Memorial:
"For the reasons stated in Part II of this Co~~nter-MemoriaBl,e lgium
requests the Couirt. as a preliminary matter, to iidjudge and declare that
the Court lacks jiirisdiction in this case andlor that the application by the
Democratic Repuiblic of the Congo against Belgium is inadmissible.
If, contrary to the preceding submission, the Court concludes that it
does have jurisdiction in this case and that the application by the Democratic Republic of the Congo is admissible, Belgiiim requests the Court to
reject the submisisions of the Democratic Repuhlic of the Congo on the
merits of the case and to dismiss the application."
12. At the oral proceedings, the following submissiclns were presented by the
Parties :
On hehcilf of the Governnlent ofthe Congo,
"In light of the facts and arguments set out during the written and oral
proceedings, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
requests the Court to adjudge and declare that:
1. by issuing aiid internationally circulating the arrest warrant of
11 April 2000 against Mr. Abdulaye Yerodia IJdombasi, Belgium committed a violaition in regard to the Democrati: Republic of the Congo
of the rule of customary international law concerning the absolute
inviolability and immunity from criminal process of incumbent foreign
ministers; in so doing, it violated the princi1)le of sovereign equality
among States;
2. a foi-mal finding by the Court of the unlawfiilness of that act constitutes an apprc~priatef orm of satisfaction, providing reparation for the
consequent moral injury to the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
3. the violations of international law underlyin4 the issue and international circulatiion of the arrest warrant of 11 April 2000 preclude any
State, including Belgium. from executing it;
4. Belgium shall be required to recall and cancel the arrest warrant of
11 April 2000 and to inform the foreign authorities to whom the war-

[Source edition page 10]

rant was circ~ilatedt hat Belgium renounces its request for their cooperation in executing the unlawful warrant."
On hrhulf if't li~G overnnîrnt of' Belgiuni,
"For the reasons stated in the Counter-Memorial of Belgium and in its
oral submissions, Belgium requests the Court, as a preliminary matter, to
adjudge and declare that the Court lacks jurisdi':tion in this case andlor
that the Application by the Democratic Repubtic of the Congo against
Belgium is inadmissible.
If, contrary to the submissions of Belgium wiih regard to the Court's
jurisdiction and tlhe admissibility of the Applicat on, the Court concludes
that it does have jurisdiction in this case and that the Application by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is admissib e, Belgium requests the
Court to reject the submissions of the Democratii Republic of the Congo
on the merits of the case and to dismiss the Appication."
13. On 11 April 2!000 an investigating judge 01' the Brussels Tribunal
de première instance issued "an international arrest warrant in absentiu"
against Mr. Abdulaye Yerodia Ndombasi, charging him, as perpetrator
or co-perpetrator, with offences constituting grave breaches of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and of the Additional Protocols thereto, and with
crimes against humanity.
At the tiine when the arrest warrant was issuecl Mr. Yerodia was the
Minister for Foreign. Affairs of the Congo.
14. The arrest warrant was transmitted to the Congo on 7 June 2000,
being received by the Congolese authorities on l:! July 2000. According
to Belgium, the warrant was at the same time trinsmitted to the International Criminal Police Organization (Interl,ol), an organization
whose function is ta' enhance and facilitate cross.border criminal police
co-operation worldwide; through the latter, it \vas circulated internationally.
15. In the arrest warrant, Mr. Yerodia is accused of having made various speeches inciting, racial hatred during the month of August 1998. The
crimes with which Mr. Yerodia was charged were punishable in Belgium
under the Law of 16 June 1993 "concerning the Punishment of Grave
Breaches of the International Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949
and of Protocols 1 and II of 8 June 1977 A~iditional Thereto", as
amended by the Law of 10 February 1999 "concerning the Punishment of
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law" (hereinafter
referred to as the "Elelgian Law").
Article 7 of the B,elgian Law provides that "The Belgian courts shall
have jurisdiction in respect of the offences provlded for in the present
Law. wheresoever they may have been cornmittecl". In the present case,
according to Belgium. the cornplaints that initiatcd the proceedings as a
result of which the arrest warrant was issued emanated from 12 individuals al1 resident in Belgium, five of whom were of Belgian nationality.
It is not contested by Belgiun~,h owever, that th: alleged acts to which

[Source edition page 11]

the arrest warrant relates were committed outside Belgian territory, that
Mr. Yerodia was ncit a Belgian national at the time of those acts, and
that Mr. Yerodia wals not in Belgian territory at ih e time that the arrest
warrant was issued and circulated. That no Belgian nationals were victims of the violence that was said to have resultrd from Mr. Yerodia's
alleged offences was also uncontested.
Article 5, paragraph 3, of the Belgian Law further provides that
"[ilmmunity attachirig to the official capacity of ;t person shall not prevent the application of the present Law".
16. At the hearing,~B, elgium further claimed th it it offered "to entrust
the case to the comptent authorities [of the Gong>] for enquiry and possible prosecution", and referred to a certain nu~nbero f steps which it
claimed to have taken in this regard from September 2000, that is, before
the filing of the Application instituting proceedirigs. The Congo for its
part stated the following: "We have scant infornation concerning the
form [of these Belgian proposals]." It added tha "these proposals . . .
appear to have been made very belatedly, namely ujter an arrest warrant
against Mr. Yerodia had been issued".
17. On 17 October 2000, the Congo filed in the Registry an Application instituting the present proceedings (see paragi aph 1 above), in which
the Court was requested "to declare that the Kingdom of Belgium shall
annul the international arrest warrant issued o~i11 April 2000". The
Congo relied in its ,4pplication on two separate legal grounds. First, it
claimed that "[tlhe universal jurisdiction that the 13elgian State attributes
to itself under Article 7 of the Law in question" constituted a
"[v]iolation of the principle that a State may not exercise its authority on the territory of anothei- State and of the principle of sovereign
equality among al1 Members of the United hations, as laid down in
Article 2, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations".
Secondly, it claimed that "[tlhe non-recognition, on the basis of
Article 5 . . . of the Belgian Law, of the immunit) of a Minister for Foreign Affairs in officc" constituted a "[v]iolation of the diplomatic immunity of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of a so~ereignS tate, as recognized by the jurispriudence of the Court and foll3wing from Article 41,
paragraph 2, of the Vienna Convention of 18 A~ril1 961 on Diplornatic
Relations".
18. On the same day that it filed its Application instituting proceedings, the Congo submitted a request to the Court for the indication of a
provisional measure under Article 41 of the Statute of the Court. During
the hearings devoted to consideration of that request, the Court was
informed that in November 2000 a ministerial rejhuffle had taken place
in the Congo, folloviiing which Mr. Yerodia had zeased to hold office as
Minister for Foreigri Affairs and had been entrusted with the portfolio of
Minister of Education. Belgium accordingly cla~medt hat the Congo's
Application had become moot and asked the Coiirt, as has already been

[Source edition page 12]

recalled, to remove the case from the List. By Order of 8 December 2000,
the Court rejected both Belgium's submissions to that effect and also the
Congo's request for the indication of provisional measures (see paragraph 4 above).
19. From mid-April2001, with the formation of a new Government in
the Congo, Mr. Yerodia ceased to hold the post ~f Minister of Education. He no longer holds any ministerial office today.
20. On 12 September 2001, the Belgian Natiorial Central Bureau of
Interpol requested the Interpol General Secretariat to issue a Red Notice
in respect of Mr. Yerodia. Such notices concern infiividuals whose arrest
is requested with a view to extradition. On 19 October 2001, at the public
sittings held to hear the oral arguments of the Parti-s in the case, Belgium
informed the Court that Interpol had responded on 27 September 2001
with a request for additional information, and that no Red Notice had
yet been circulated.
21. Although the ,4pplication of the Congo ortginally advanced two
separate legal groundls (see paragraph 17 above), I he submissions of the
Congo in its Memorial and the final submissions which it presented at the
end of the oral proceedings refer only to a violatio 1 "in regard to the . . .
Congo of the rule of customary international law cl~ncerningth e absolute
inviolability and immunity from criminal process of incumbent foreign
ministers" (see paragraphs 1 1 and 12 above).
22. In their written pleadings, and in oral argument, the Parties
addressed issues of jurisdiction and admissibility as well as the merits (see
paragraphs 5 and 6 above). In this connection, 13elgium raised certain
objections which the Court will begin by addressiiig.
23. The first objection presented by Belgium reiids as follows:
"That, in the light of the fact that Mr. Yerodia Ndombasi is no
longer either Minister for Foreign Affairs of the [Congo] or a minister occupying any other position in the . . . Government [of the
Congo], there no longer a 'legal dispute' between the Parties
iij
within the meanung of this term in the Optionil Clause Declarations
of the Parties and that the Court accordingly lacks jurisdiction in
this case."
24. Belgium does not deny that such a legal d spute existed between
the Parties at the tin~ew hen the Congo filed its Application instituting
proceedings, and that the Court was properly seised by that Application.
However, it contends that the question is not whether a legal dispute

[Source edition page 13]

existed at that time, but whether a legal dispute exijts at the present time.
Belgium refers in this respect inter alia to the Nor, herrz Cameroons case,
in which the Court found that it "may pronounce iudgment only in connection with concrete cases where there exists at th: time of the adjudication an actual controversy involving a conflict of legal interests between
the parties" (I.C.J. Reports 1963, pp. 33-34), as well as to the Nucleur
Tests cases ('Austrulitz v. France)(New Zealurzd v. France), in which the
Court stated the following: "The Court, as a court of law, is called upon
to resolve existing disputes between States . . . The dispute brought
before it must therefore continue to exist at the time when the Court
makes its decision" (1.C .J Reports 1974, pp. 270-2 7 1, para. 55; p. 476,
para. 58). Belgium argues that the position of MI. Yerodia as Minister
for Foreign Affairs was central to the Congo's Application instituting
proceedings. and emphasizes that there has now be:n a change of circumstances at the very heart of the case, in view of the fact that Mr. Yerodia
was relieved of his position as Minister for Foreign Affairs in November 2000 and that, since 15 April2001, he has occupied no position in the
Government of the Congo (see paragraphs 18 and 19 above). According
to Belgium, while there may still be a difference cf opinion between the
Parties on the scope and content of internatioral law governing the
immunities of a Minister for Foreign Affairs, thai difference of opinion
has now become a matter of abstract, rather than of practical, concern.
The result, in Belgiurn's view, is that the case has become an attempt by
the Congo to "[seek] an advisory opinion from the Court", and no longer
a "concrete case" involving an "actual controvers) " between the Parties,
and that the Court accordingly lacks jurisdiction in the case.
25. The Congo rej~ectst his objection of Belgium It contends that there
is indeed a legal dispute between the Parties, in ihat the Congo claims
that the arrest warrant was issued in violation of the immunity of its
Minister for Foreign Affairs, that that warrant v/as unlawful ah initio,
and that this legal defect persists despite the sub'equent changes in the
position occupied by the individual concerned, wliile Belgium maintains
that the issue and circulation of the arrest warrant were not contrary to
international law. The Congo adds that the termination of Mr. Yerodia's
officia1 duties in no way operated to efface the wrongful act and the
injury that flowed from it, for which the Congo CO ltinues to seek redress.
26. The Court recalls that, according to its settled jurisprudence, its
jurisdiction must be determined at the time that he act instituting proceedings was filed. Thus, if the Court has jurisdiction on the date the case
is referred to it, it continues to do so regardless of subsequent events.
Such events might lead to a finding that an application has subsequently

[Source edition page 14]

ARREST WARRANT (JUDGMENT) 13

become moot and to a decision not to proceed to judgment on the merits,
but they cannot deprive the Court of jurisdiction (see Nottebohm,
Preliminary Objection, Judgment, II.C.J. Reports 1953, p. 122; Right of
Passage over Indian Territory, Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I.C.J.
Reports 1957, p. 142; Questions of Interpretation and Application of the
1971 Montreal Convention arising from the Aerial Incident at Lockerbie
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya v. United Kingdom), Preliminary Objections,
Judgment, II.C.J. Reports 1998, pp. 23-24, para. 38; and Questions of
Interpretation and Application of the 1971 Montreal Convention arising
from the Aerial Incident at Lockerbie (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya v. United
States of America), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports
1998, p. 129, para. 37).
27. Article 36, paragraph 2, of the Statute of the Court provides:

“The States parties to the present Statute may at any time declare
that they recognize as compulsory ipso facto and without special
agreement, in relation to any other State accepting the same obligation, the jurisdiction of the Court in all legal disputes concerning:

(a) the interpretation of a treaty;

(b) any question of international law;

(c) the existence of any fact which, if established, would constitute
a breach of an international obligation;

(d) the nature or extent of the reparation to be made for the breach
of an international obligation.”

On 17 October 2000, the date that the Congo’s Application instituting
these proceedings was filed, each of the Parties was bound by a declaration of acceptance of compulsory jurisdiction, filed in accordance with
the above provision: Belgium by a declaration of 17 June 1958 and the
Congo by a declaration of 8 February 1989. Those declarations contained no reservation applicable to the present case.

Moreover, it is not contested by the Parties that at the material time
there was a legal dispute between them concerning the international lawfulness of the arrest warrant of 11 April 2000 and the consequences to be
drawn if the warrant was unlawful. Such a dispute was clearly a legal dispute within the meaning of the Court’s jurisprudence, namely “a disagreement on a point of law or fact, a conflict of legal views or of interests
between two persons” in which “the claim of one party is positively
opposed by the other” (Questions of Interpretation and Application of the
1971 Montreal Convention arising from the Aerial Incident at Lockerbie
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya v. United Kingdom), Preliminary Objections,
Judgment, II.C.J. Reports 1998, p. 17, para. 22; and Questions of Interpretation and Application of the 1971 Montreal Convention arising from
the Aerial Incident at Lockerbie (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya v. United
States of America), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, II.C.J. Reports
1998, pp. 122-123, para. 21).

28. The Court accordingly concludes that at the time that it was seised

[Source edition page 15]

.ARREST WARRANT (JUDGMENT) 14
of the case it had jurisdiction to deal with it. and that it still has such
jurisdiction. Belgium's first objection must therefore be rejected.
29. The second objection presented by Belgium is the following:
"That in the light of the fact that Mr. Yerodia Ndombasi is no
longer either Miriister for Foreign Affairs of the [Congo] or a minister occupying any other position in the . . Government [of the
Congo], the case is now without object and the Court should accordingly decline to proceed to judgment on the rrerits of the case."
30. Belgium also ri:lies in support of this objection on the Nortlzern
Cumeroon.~c ase, in which the Court considered tliat it would not be a
proper discharge of ils duties to proceed further iii a case in which any
judgment that the Court might pronounce would be "without object"
(I.C . J. Reports 1963, p. 38), and on the Nucleur Te~tcsa ses, in which the
Court saw "no reasori to allow the continuance of proceedings which it
knows are bound to be fruitless" (I.C .J. Reports 1974, p. 271, para. 58;
p. 477, para. 61). Belgium maintains that the decllrations requested by
the Congo in its first and second submissions would clearly fall within the
principles enunciated by the Court in those cases, since a judgment of the
Court on the merits in this case could onlv be dire<t ed towards the clarification of the law in this area for the futire, or be designed to reinforce
the position of one or other Party. It relies in support of this argument on
the fact that the Congo does not allege any material injury and is not
seeking compensatory damages. It adds that the issue and transmission
of the arrest warrant were not predicated on the ministerial status of the
person concerned, that he is no longer a minister, and that the case is
accordingly now devoid of object.
31. The Congo contests this argument of Belgium, and emphasizes
that the aim of the Congo to have the disputed arrest warrant
-
annulled and to obtain redress for the moral injury suffered remains
-
unachieved at the point in time when the Court is called upon to decide
the dispute. According to the Congo, in order for the case to have
become devoid of ob-ject during the proceedings, the cause of the violation of the right would have had to disappear, ald the redress sought
would have to have been obtained.
32. The Court has already affirmed on a number csf occasions that events
occurring subsequent ito the filing of an application rlay render the application without object such that the Court is not called lpon to give a decision
thereon (see Qurstiorzc, oflnterprrtrition und Applplicution of tlzc 1971 Mont-

[Source edition page 16]

reul Convention urising,fi.om the Aeviul Incident ut Lockerbie (Lihyu~Ar ub
Jumalziriyu v. United Kingdom), Prelitninury Ohjections, Judgment, I. C.J .
Reports 1998, p. 26, para. 46; and Questions of Inte.pretution und Application of the 1971 Montreal Convention urising from the Aeriul Incident ut
Lockerhie (Lihyan Aruh Jumuhiriyu v. United Stute.; of Americu), Preliminu- Objections, Judgment, 1. C. J. Reports 1998, p. 131, para. 45).
However. it considlers that this is not such a case. The change which
has occurred in the situation of Mr. Yerodia has not in fact put an end to
the dispute between the Parties and has not deprilied the Application of
its object. The Congo argues that the arrest warrant issued by the Belgian
judicial authorities against Mr. Yerodia was and remains unlawful. It
asks the Court to hold that the warrant is unl,iwful, thus providing
redress for the moral injury which the warrant alleyedly caused to it. The
Congo also continues to seek the cancellation ol' the warrant. For its
part, Belgium contends that it did not act in violation of international
law and it disputes the Congo's submissions. In th: view of the Court. it
follows from the foregoing that the Application of the Congo is not now
without object and that accordingly the case is not moot. Belgium's
second objection must accordingly be rejected.
33. The third Belgian objection is put as follows
"That the case as it now stands is materialiy different to that set
out in the [Congol's Application instituting prlxeedings and that the
Court accordingly lacks jurisdiction in the case andlor that the application is inadmissible."
34. According to Belgium, it would be contrarJ1t o legal security and
the sound administration of justice for an applicant State to continue
proceedings in circurnstances in which the factua dimension on which
the Application was based has changed fundamentally, since the respondent State would in those circumstances be uncertain, until the very last
moment, of the substance of the claims against it. Belgium argues that
the prejudice sufferecl by the respondent State in ihis situation is analogous to the situation in which an applicant State lormulates new claims
during the course of the proceedings. It refers to tl-e jurisprudence of the
Court holding inadmissible new claims formulatecl during the course of
the proceedings which, had they been entertained. would have transformed the subject ol' the dispute originally brought before it under the
terms of the Application (see Fislzeric~sJ ~vi~sdictio(nS pciin v. Crinadu),
Jurisclic.tiotz of' th@ Court, Judgm~tzt,I . CI J. Repo~ts 1998, pp. 447-448,
para. 29). In the circumstances, Belgium contencls that, if the Congo
wishes to maintain its claims, it should be required to initiate proceedings
afresh or, at the very least, apply to the Court for p:rmission to amend its
initial Application.

[Source edition page 17]

35. In response, the Congo denies that there has been a substantial
amendment of the terms of its Application, and nsists that it has presented no new claim, whether of substance or of iorm, that would have
transformed the subject-matter of the dispute. The Congo maintains that
it has done nothing through the various stages i 1 the proceedings but
"condense and refine" its claims, as do most States that appear before the
Court, and that it is simply making use of the riglit of parties to amend
their submissions until the end of the oral proceec ings.
36. The Court notes that, in accordance with scttled jurisprudence, it
"cannot, in principle, allow a dispute brought befctre it by application to
be transformed by amendments in the submissions into another dispute
which is different in character" (Société commerciale de Belgique, Judgment, 1939, P. C.I . J., Series AIB, No. 78, p. 173 ; 4:f. Militury and Paramilitary Actiiities in arzci uguinst Nicaragua (Nica,agua v. United States
of' Arnerica), Jurisdiction and Adnzissihility, Jud~ment,1 . C.J . Reports
1984, p. 427, para. 80; see also Certain Phospjzate Lands in Nauru
(Nauru v. Australia), Preliminary Objections, Judgment, 1.C .J . Reports
1992, pp. 264-267, ini particular paras. 69 and 70:l. However, the Court
considers that in the present case the facts undeilying the Application
have not changed in a way that produced such a transformation in the
dispute brought before it. The question submitted to the Court for decision remains whether the issue and circulation of the arrest warrant by
the Belgian judicial authorities against a person wlho was at that time the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Congo were coiîtrary to international
law. The Congo's firial submissions arise "directly out of the question
which is the subject-matter of that Application" (Fisheries Jurisdiction
(Federal Republic qf' Gerrnuny v. Iceland), Me.-its, Judgment, 1. C.J .
Reports 1974, p. 203, para. 72; see also Temple of Preuh Vilzear, Merits,
Judgmen t, 1. C.J . Reports 1962, p. 36).
In these circumst;~nces,t he Court considers that Belgium cannot
validly maintain thai; the dispute brought before the Court was transformed in a way that affected its ability to prepare its defence, or that
the requirements of the sound administration of justice were infringed.
Belgium's third objection must accordingly be rejccted.
37. The fourth Bel.gian objection reads as follo~vs:
"That, in the light of the new circumstances concerning Mr. Yerodia Ndombasi, the case has assumed the character of an action of
diplornatic protection but one in which the individual being pro-

[Source edition page 18]

tected has failed to exhaust local remedies, and that the Court
accordingly lacks jurisdiction in the case andlor that the application
is inadmissible."
38. In this respect, Belgium accepts that, when the case was first instituted, the Congo had a direct legal interest in the niatter, and was asserting a claim in its own name in respect of the allegetl violation by Belgium
of the immunity of the Congo's Foreign Minister. 1-Iowever, according to
Belgium, the case was radically transformed aftei the Application was
filed, iiamely on 15 April 2001. when Mr. Yerodia ceased to be a member
of the Congolese Government. Belgium maintains that two of the requests
made of the Court in the Congo's final submissions in practice now con-
Cern the legal effect of an arrest warrant issued aga nst a private citizen of
the Congo, and that 1 hese issues fa11 within the rea m of an action of diplomatic protection. It adds that the individual concerned has not
exhausted al1 available remedies under Belgian law a necessary condition
before the Congo can espouse the cause of one 01' its nationals in international proceedings
39. The Congo, on the other hand, denies that this is an action for
diplomatic protection. It maintains that it is brin:$& these proceedings
in the name of the Congolese State, on account of the violation of the
immunity of its Minister for Foreign Affairs. The Congo further denies
the availability of rennedies under Belgian law. It pints out in this regard
that it is only when the Crown Prosecutor has betome seised of the case
file and makes submissions to the Chambre du conseil that the accused
can defend himself before the Chambre and seek i O have the charge dismissed.
40. The Court notes that the Congo has never sought to invoke before
it Mr. Yerodia's persona1 rights. It considers that, despite the change in
professional situation of Mr. Yerodia, the character of the dispute submitted to the Court by means of the Application has not changed: the
dispute still concerris the lawfulness of the arr:st warrant issued on
11 April 2000 against a person who was at the tine Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Congo, and the question whether the rights of the Congo
have or have not been violated by that warrant. As the Congo is not acting in the context of protection of one of its nationals, Belgium cannot
rely upon the rules relating to the exhaustion of local remedies.
In any event, the Court recalls that an objectior, based on non-exhaustion of local remedies relates to the admissibility of the application (see
Interlzundel, Prelirninary Objections, Judgment, 1. C. J. Reports 1959,
p. 26; Elettrunica Siculu S.p.A . (ELSI), Judgment, 1. C J. Reports 1989,
p. 42, para. 49). Under settled jurisprudence, the critical date for determining the admissibility of an application is the (late on which it is filed

[Source edition page 19]

(see Questions of' Interpretation and Applicution of' the 1971 Montreal
Converztion uri.singjkorn the Aeriul Incident ut Lockerbie (Libyun Arub
Jamahirij~uv . United Kingdom), Prelirninary Objections, Judgrnent, 1. C.J .
Reports 1998, pp. 25-26, paras. 43-44; and Questions of Interpretation
und Applicution of the 1971 Montreal Convention clrising.frorn the Aerial
Incident ut Lockerhie (Libyun Arab Jarnuhiriy~ v. United States qf
Anzerica), Prelimincrry Objections, Judgtrzetzt, L C. J. Reports 1998,
pp. 130-13 1, paras. 4.2-43). Belgium accepts that, on the date on which
the Congo filed the A.pplication instituting proceecings, the Congo had a
direct legal interest in the matter, and was asserting a claim in its own
name. Belgium's fourth objection must accordingly be rejected.
41. As a subsidiary argument, Belgium further contends that "[iln the
event that the Court t-lecides that it does have jurisdiction in this case and
that the application iij admissible, . . . the non ultra petita rule operates to
limit the jurisdiction of the Court to those issues that are the subject of
the [Congol's final isubmissions". Belgium points out that, while the
Congo initially advanced a twofold argument, based, on the one hand,
on the Belgian judge's lack of jurisdiction, and, on the other, on the
immunity from jurisdiction enjoyed by its Ministcr for Foreign Affairs,
the Congo no longer claims in its final submissions that Belgium wrongly
conferred upon itself universal jurisdiction in ubse~ltia.A ccording to Belgium, the Congo novi confines itself to arguing that the arrest warrant of
11 April 2000 was unlawful because it violated th<.i mmunity from jurisdiction of its Minister for Foreign Affairs, and that the Court consequently cannot rule on the issue of universal juristiiction in any decision
it renders on the merits of the case.
42. The Congo, for its part, states that its intt:rest in bringing these
proceedings is to obtilin a finding by the Court that it has been the victim
of an internationally wrongful act, the question whether this case involves
the "exercise of an excessive universal jurisdiction ' being in this connection only a secondary consideration. The Congo asserts that any consideration by the Court of the issues of international aw raised by universal
jurisdiction would be undertaken not at the request of the Congo but,
rather, by virtue of the defence strategy adopttd by Belgium, which
appears to maintain 1 hat the exercise of such jurisdiction can "represent a
valid counterweight ito the observance of immunities".
43. The Court would recall the well-established principle that "it is the
duty of the Court not only to reply to the questions as stated in the final
submissions of the parties, but also to abstain frc'm deciding points not
included in those submissions" (Asylunz, Judgment. 1. C. J. Reports 1950,

[Source edition page 20]

p. 402). While the Court is thus not entitled to decide upon questions not
asked of it, the noui ultvu petitu rule nonetheless cannot preclude the
Court from addressing certain legal points in its reasoning. Thus in the
present case the Court may not rule, in the operative part of its Judgment, on the question whether the disputed arrest warrant, issued by the
Belgian investigating judge in exercise of his purported universal jurisdiction, complied in tl-iat regard with the rules anci principles of international law governinj; the jurisdiction of national courts. This does not
mean, however, that the Court may not deal with certain aspects of that
question in the reasoning of its Judgment, shoulc it deem this necessary
or desirable.
44. The Court coincludes from the foregoing that it has jurisdiction to
entertain the Congol's Application, that the Application is not without
object and that accordingly the case is not moot and that the Application is admissible. T'hus. the Court now turns to the merits of the case.
45. As indicated above (see paragraphs 41 to 4: above), in its Application instituting these proceedings, the Congo originally challenged the
legality of the arrest warrant of 11 April 2000 on two separate grounds:
on the one hand, Belgium's claim to exercise a universal jurisdiction and,
on the other, the alleged violation of the immunities of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Congo then in office. However, in its submissions
in its Memorial, ancl in its final submissions at the close of the oral proceedings, the Congo invokes only the latter grouiid.
46. As a matter alf logic, the second ground should be addressed only
once there has been a determination in respect of the first, since it is only
where a State has jui-isdiction under international law in relation to a particular matter that there can be any question of immunities in regard to
the exercise of that jurisdiction. However, in the present case, and in view
of the final form of the Congo's submissions. the Court will address first
.a
the question whether, assuming that it had jurijdiction under international law to issue and circulate the arrest warrant of 11 A~ri2i0 00. Belgium in so doing violated the immunities of the then Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Cong~o.
47. The Congo maintains that, during his or hcr term of office, a Minister for Foreign Affairs of a sovereign State is entitled to inviolability

[Source edition page 21]

and to immunity fr'om criminal process being "ibsolute or complete",
that is to say, they are subject to no exception. P~ccordingly,t he congo
contends that no criininal prosecution may be brought against a Minister
for Foreign Affairs in a foreign court as long ai he or she remains in
office, and that any fi nding of criminal responsibility by a domestic court
in a foreign country, or any act of investigation iindertaken with a view
to bringing him or her to court, would contravene the principle of immunity from jurisdiction. According to the Congo, th? basis of such criminal
immunity is purely hnctional, and immunity is azcorded under customary international law simply in order to enable the foreign State representative enjoying siich immunity to perform his or her functions freely
and without let or tiindrance. The Congo adds that the immunity thus
accorded to Ministers for Foreign Affairs when i 1 office coverç al1 their
acts, including any ccsmmitted before they took of ice, and that it is irrelevant whether the act:s done whilst in office may be characterized or not as
"official acts".
48. The Congo states further that it does not ileny the existence of a
principle of international criminal law, deriving fr2m the decisions of the
Nuremberg and Tokyo international military tribunals, that the accused's
official capacity at the time of the acts cannot, before any court, whether
domestic or international, constitute a "ground 2f exemption from his
criminal responsibiliity or a ground for mitigation of sentence". The
Congo then stresses ithat the fact that an immunitb might bar prosecution
before a specific court or over a specific period coes not mean that the
same prosecution cannot be brought, if appropriate, before another court
which is not bound by that immunity, or at anothc r time when the immunity need no longer be taken into account. It concludes that immunity
does not mean impunity.
49. Belgium maintains for its part that, while Ministers for Foreign
Affairs in office generally enjoy an immunity from jurisdiction before the
courts of a foreign State, such immunity applies only to acts carried out
in the course of theii- officia1 functions, and cannot protect such persons
in respect of private acts or when they are acting otherwise than in the
performance of their officia1 functions.
50. Belgium further states that, in the circumstances of the present
case, Mr. Yerodia erijoyed no immunity at the tire when he is alleged to
have committed the acts of which he is accused, and that there is no evidence that he was then acting in any official capacity. It observes that the
arrest warrant was iijsued against Mr. Yerodia personally.
51. The Court would observe at the outset thaf in international law it
is firmly established that, as also diplomatic and consular agents, certain

[Source edition page 22]

holders of high-ranking office in a State, such as ttle Head of State, Head
of Government and Minister for Foreign Affairs, enjoy immunities from
jurisdiction in other States, both civil and crimin;il. For the purposes of
the present case, it is only the immunity from criminal jurisdiction and
the inviolability of an incumbent Minister for Foribign Affairs that faIl for
the Court to consider.
52. A certain numiber of treaty instruments wer: cited by the Parties in
this regard. These included, first, the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 18 April 1961, which states in its pre imble that the purpose
of diplomatic privileges and immunities is "to e lsure the efficient performance of the func;tions of diplomatic missions as representing States".
It provides in Article 32 that only the sending State may waive such
immunity. On these points, the Vienna Conventicn on Diplomatic Relations, to which both the Congo and Belgium are parties, reflects customary international lavi. The same applies to the corresponding provisions
of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations of 24 April 1963. to
which the Congo and Belgium are also parties.
The Congo and I3elgium further cite the Ne- York Convention on
Special Missions of 8 December 1969, to which ~heya re not, however.
parties. They recall ihat under Article 21, paragrilph 2, of that Convention :
"The Head of the Government, the Minis~erf or Foreign Affairs
and otlier persoils of high rank, when they ta1.e part in a special mission of the sencling State, shall enjoy in the receiving State or in a
third State, in alddition to what is granted by the present Convention, the facilities, privileges and immunitier, accorded by international law."
These conventions, provide useful guidance on certain aspects of the
question of immuniities. They do not, however, contain any provision
specifically defining the immunities enjoyed by Ministers for Foreign
Affairs. It is consequently on the basis of custornary international law
that the Court must decide the questions relatin;: to the immunities of
such Ministers raisecl in the present case.
53. In customary international law, the immunities accorded to Ministers for Foreign Afjàirs are not granted for their oersonal benefit, but to
ensure the effective performance of their functions on behalf of their
respective States. In order to determine the exterit of these immunities,
the Court must therefore first consider the nature of the functions exercised by a Minister for Foreign Affairs. He or sh: is in charge of his or
her Government's diplomatic activities and generally acts as its representative in internatilonal negotiations and intergovernmental meetings.
Ambassadors and oither diplomatic agents carry out their duties under
his or her authority. His or her acts may bind the State represented, and
there is a presumptioln that a Minister for Foreign Affairs, simply by virtue of that office, has full powers to act on behalf of the State (see, for

[Source edition page 23]

example, Article 7, paragraph 2 (u),o f the 1969 Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties). In the performance of thesr: functions, he or she is
frequently required to travel internationally, and thus must be in a position freely to do so whenever the need should arise. He or she must also
be in constant comrnunication with the Government, and with its diplomatic missions around the world, and be capable at any time of communicating with represi:ntatives of other States. The Court further observes
that a Minister for Foreign Affairs, responsible for the conduct of his or
her State's relations with al1 other States, occupii:~a position such that,
like the Head of State or the Head of Governmt:nt, he or she is recognized under international law as representative of the State solely by virtue of his or her office. He or she does not halle to present letters of
credence: to the contrary, it is generally the Minister who determines the
authority to be conferred upon diplomatic agents and countersigns their
letters of credence. Finally, it is to the Minister f3r Foreign Affairs that
chargés d'affaires are accredited.
54. The Court accordingly concludes that the 'unctions of a Minister
for Foreign Affairs (are such that, throughout the duration of his or her
office, he or she when abroad enjoys full immun ty from criminal jurisdiction and inviolability. That immunity and that lnviolability protect the
individual concernecl against any act of authority of another State which
would hinder him 01- her in the performance of his or her duties.
55. In this respect, no distinction can be drawn between acts performed by a Minister for Foreign Affairs in an "official" capacity, and
those claimed to have been performed in a "privat~:c apacity", or, for that
matter, between acts performed before the person concerned assumed
office as Minister for Foreign Affairs and acts committed during the
period of office. Thus, if a Minister for Foreigr~A ffairs is arrested in
another State on a ci-iminal charge, he or she is cli,arly thereby prevented
from exercising the functions of his or her office. The consequences of
such impediment to the exercise of those officia functions are equally
serious, regardless of whether the Minister for Foreign Affairs was, at the
time of arrest, preseilt in the territory of the arre:,ting State on an "official" visit or a "private" visit, regardless of whether the arrest relates to
acts allegedly perforined before the person becam: the Minister for Foreign Affairs or to acts perforrned while in office, and regardless of
whether the arrest relates to alleged acts performed in an "official" capacity or a "private" capacity. Furthermore, even the mere risk that, by
travelling to or transiting another State a Minister for Foreign Affairs
might be exposing himself or herself to legal proceedings could deter the
Minister from travelling internationally when required to do so for the
purposes of the performance of his or her official functions.

[Source edition page 24]

56. The Court will now address Belgium's argument that immunities
accorded to incumbent Ministers for Foreign Affi~irsc an in no case protect them where the:y are suspected of having coinmitted war crimes or
crimes against humanity. In support of this position, Belgium refers in its
Counter-Memorial 1:o various legal instruments creating international
criminal tribunals, to examples from national legislation, and to the jurisprudence of national and international courts.
Belgium begins by pointing out that certain piovisions of the instruments creating international criminal tribunals state expressly that the
officia1 capacity of a person shall not be a bar to the exercise by such
tribunals of their jurisdiction.
Belgium also places emphasis on certain decisions of national courts,
and in particular on the judgments rendered on 24 March 1999 by the
House of Lords in the United Kingdom and on 13 March 2001 by the
Court of Cassation in France in the Pinochet ancl Qudduji cases respectively, in which it cclntends that an exception to the immunity rule was
accepted in the case of serious crimes under inernational law. Thus,
according to Belgiurn, the Pinochet decision recognizes an exception to
the immunity rule when Lord Millett stated that "(ilnternational law cannot be supposed to have established a crime having the character of a jus
cogens and at the saime time to have provided an immunity which is coextensive with the obligation it seeks to impose", or when Lord Phillips
of Worth Matravers said that "no established rule of international law
requires state immuinity vatione muteriue to be t~ccordedi n respect of
prosecution for an international crime". As to the French Court of Cassation, Belgium contends that, in holding that, "under international law
as it currently stands, the crime alleged [acts of terrorism], irrespective of
its gravity, does not come within the exceptions to the principle of immunity from jurisdiction for incumbent foreign Heacls of State", the Court
explicitly recognized the existence of such exceptions.
57. The Congo, for its part, States that, under international law as it
currently stands, there is no basis for asserting tha there is any exception
to the principle of absolute immunity from crimin;tl process of an incumbent Minister for Foreign Affairs where he or she is accused of having
committed crimes under international law.
In support of this contention, the Congo refers to State practice, giving
particular consideration in this regard to the Pinochet and Qudduji cases,
and concluding that such practice does not correspond to that which Belgium claims but, on the contrary, confirms the ;~bsoluten ature of the
immunity from criminal process of Heads of State and Ministers for Foreign Affairs. Thus, in the Pinoclzet case, the Congo cites Lord Browne-
Wilkinson's statemenit that "[tlhis immunity enjoycd by a head of state in
power and an ambasisador in post is a complete immunity attached to the
person of the head of state or ambassador and rendering him immune
from al1 actions or prosecutions . . .". Accordil~gt o the Congo, the

[Source edition page 25]

French Court of Cassation adopted the same position in its Qudduj judgment, in affirming that "international custom birs the prosecution of
incumbent Heads of State, in the absence of any contrary international
provision binding on the parties concerned, beforc: the criminal courts of
a foreign State".
As regards the instruments creating internaticmal criminal tribunals
and the latter's jurisprudence, these, in the Congo's view, concern only
those tribunals, and no inference can be drawn from them in regard to
criminal proceedingij before national courts against persons enjoying
immunity under international law.
58. The Court has carefully examined State practice, including national
legislation and those few decisions of national higher courts, such as the
House of Lords or the French Court of Cassation. It has been unable to
deduce from this practice that there exists under c lstomary international
law any form of exception to the rule according irilmunity from criminal
jurisdiction and inviolability to incumbent Ministc rs for Foreign Affairs,
where they are susgected of having committed war crimes or crimes
against humanity.
The Court has also examined the rules conceining the immunity or
criminal responsibility of persons having an officia1 capacity contained in
the legal instruments creating international criminiil tribunals, and which
are specifically applicable to the latter (see Chartlx of the International
Military Tribunal of Nuremberg, Art. 7; Charter of the International
Military Tribunal of Tokyo, Art. 6; Statute of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, Art. 7, para. Z; Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, Art. 6, para. 2; Statute of the
International Criminal Court, Art. 27). It finds tliat these rules likewise
do not enable it to conclude that any such an exception exists in customary international law in regard to national courts.
Finally, none of the decisions of the Nuremberg and Tokyo international military tribunals, or of the lnternational Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia, cited by Belgium deal with the question of the
immunities of incumbent Ministers for Foreign Affairs before national
courts where they are accused of having committed war crimes or crimes
against humanity. The Court accordingly notes tliat those decisions are
in no way at variance with the findings it has reac hed above.
In view of the foregoing, the Court accordingly cannot accept Belgium's argument in this regard.
59. It should further be noted that the rules go\ erning the jurisdiction
of national courts must be carefully distinguished from those governing
jurisdictional immunities: jurisdiction does not irriply absence of immunity, while absence of immunity does not imply jurisdiction. Thus,

[Source edition page 26]

although various international conventions or the prevention and
punishment of certain serious crimes impose or States obligations of
prosecution or extraclition, thereby requiring them to extend their criminal
jurisdiction, such extension of jurisdiction in no way affects immunities
under customary international law, including those of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs. These remain opposable before he courts of a foreign
State, even where those courts exercise such a jurisdiction under
these conventions.
60. The Court emphasizes, however, that the i~nmunityf rom jurisdiction enjoyed by incumbent Ministers for Foreign Affairs does not mean
that they enjoy impunity in respect of any crimes they might have committed, irrespective of their gravity. Immunity from criminal jurisdiction
and individual crimiinal responsibility are quite separate concepts. While
jurisdictional immuriity is procedural in nature, criminal responsibility
is a question of substantive law. Jurisdictional i~nmunitym ay well bar
prosecution for a certain period or for certain offences; it cannot exonerate the person to whom it applies from al1 criminal responsibility.
61. Accordingly, the immunities enjoyed under Bnternational law by an
incumbent or former Minister for Foreign Affairs do not represent a bar
to criminal prosecution in certain circumstances.
First, such persoris enjoy no criminal immunity under international
law in their own countries, and may thus be tried by those countries'
courts in accordance with the relevant rules of dcmestic law.
Secondly, they will cease to enjoy immunity frorn foreign jurisdiction if
the State which they represent or have represente~ld ecides to waive that
immunity.
Thirdly, after a person ceases to hold the office of Minister for Foreign
Affairs, he or she will no longer enjoy al1 of the iinmunities accorded by
international law in other States. Provided that it has jurisdiction under
international law, a court of one State may try a former Minister for
Foreign Affairs of another State in respect of acts committed prior or
subsequent to his oir her period of office, as we 1 as in respect of acts
committed during that period of office in a private capacity.
Fourthly, an incurnbent or former Minister for Foreign Affairs may be
subject to criminal proceedings before certain international criminal
courts, where they have jurisdiction. Examples inAude the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, established pursuant to Security Council
resolutions under Clnapter VI1 of the United Nations Charter, and the
future International Criminal Court created by tl-e 1998 Rome Convention. The latter's Statute expressly provides, in Article 27, paragraph 2,
that "[i]mmunities or special procedural rules wliich may attach to the

[Source edition page 27]

official capacity of a person, whether under national or international law,
shall not bar the Court from exercising its ju-isdiction over such a
person".
62. Given the conclusions it has reached above concerning the nature
and scope of the rules governing the immunity frcm criminal jurisdiction
enjoyed by incumberit Ministers for Foreign Affairs, the Court must now
consider whether in the present case the issue 01' the arrest warrant of
11 April 2000 and ils international circulation violated those rules. The
Court recalls in this regard that the Congo requests it, in its first final
submission, to adjuclge and declare that:
"[Bly issuing and internationally circulating the arrest warrant of
11 April 2000 against Mr. Abdulaye Yerodia Ndombasi, Belgium
committed a violation in regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of the rule of customary internatior~all aw concerning the
absolute inviolability and immunity from crirlinal process of incumbent foreign ministers; in so doing, it viclated the principle of
sovereign equaliity among States."
63. In support of this submission, the Congo maintains that the arrest
warrant of II April 2000 as such represents a "ccercive legal act" which
violates the Congo's immunity and sovereign righis, inasmuch as it seeks
to "subject to an organ of domestic criminal juri:diction a member of a
foreign government who is in principle beyond its reach" and is fully
enforceable without special formality in Belgium.
The Congo consiclers that the mere issuance of the warrant thus constituted a coercive measure taken against the persan of Mr. Yerodia, even
if it was not executed.
64. As regards the international circulation of ih e said arrest warrant,
this, in the Congo's view, not only involved further violations of the rules
referred to above, but also aggravated the moral injury which it suffered
as a result of the opprobrium "thus cast upon one of the most prominent
members of its Government". The Congo further argues that such circulation was a fundaniental infringement of its sokereign rights in that it
significantly restricted the full and free exercise, t y its Minister for Foreign Affairs, of the international negotiation and representation functions entrusted to him by the Congo's former Prcsident. In the Congo's
view, Belgium "[thus] manifests an intention to h.tve the individual concerned arrested at the place where he is to be fouiid, with a view to procuring his extraditilon". The Congo emphasizej moreover that it is
necessary to avoid any confusion between the arguments concerning the
legal effect of the ari-est warrant abroad and the ciuestion of any responsibility of the foreign authorities giving effect to it. It points out in this
regard that no State has acted on the arrest warrart, and that accordingly

[Source edition page 28]

ARREST WARRANT (JUDGMENT) 27
"no further consideration need be given to the specific responsibility
which a State executing it might incur, or to tlie way in which that
responsibility should be related" to that of the Belgian State. The Congo
observes that, in such circumstances, "there [woiild bel a direct causal
relationship between the arrest warrant issued in Relgium and any act of
enforcement carried out elsewhere".
65. Belgium rejects the Congo's argument on the ground that "the
character of the arrest warrant of 11 April 2000 is :;uch that it has neither
infringed the sovereignty of, nor created any obligation for, the [Congo]".
With regard to the legal effects under Belgian la~vo f the arrest warrant
of 11 April 2000, Belgium contends that the clear purpose of the warrant
was to procure that, if found in Belgium, Mr. Yerctdia would be detained
by the relevant Belgian authorities with a view to bis prosecution for war
crimes and crimes against humanity. According to Belgium, the Belgian
investigating judge did, however, draw an explicit distinction in the warrant between, on the one hand, inlmunity from j~irisdictiona nd, on the
other hand, immuniity from enforcement as regards representatives of
foreign States who visit Belgium on the basis of an official invitation,
making it clear that such persons would be immune from enforcement of
an arrest warrant in Belgium. Belgium further coniends that, in its effect,
the disputed arrest warrant is national in charactcr, since it requires the
arrest of Mr. Yerodia if he is found in Belgium b~ t it does not have this
effect outside Belgiurn.
66. In respect of thie legal effects of the arrest warrant outside Belgium,
Belgium maintains that the warrant does not creite any obligation for
the authorities of any other State to arrest Mr. Ye*.odia in the absence of
some further step by Belgium completing or validating the arrest warrant
(such as a request for the provisional detention O ' Mr. Yerodia), or the
issuing of an arrest warrant by the appropriate authorities in the State
concerned following a request to do so, or the issuing of an Interpol Red
Notice. Accordingly, outside Belgium, while the Furpose of the warrant
was admittedly "to establish a legal basis for the arvest of Mr. Yerodia . . .
and his subsequent extradition to Belgium", the warrant had no legal
effect unless it was validated or completed by sonie prior act "requiring
the arrest of Mr. Yerodia by the relevant authorities in a third State".
Belgium further argues that "[ilf a State had executed the arrest warrant,
it might infringe Mr. [Yerodia's] criminal immunit q", but that "the Party
directly responsible for that infringement would have been that State and
not Belgium".
67. The Court will first recall that the "international arrest warrant
in cth.serztin", issued on 11 April 2000 by an investigating judge of the
Brussels Tribunal de première instance, is directec against Mr. Yerodia,

[Source edition page 29]

ARREST WARRANT (JUDGMENT) 28
stating that he is "currently Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, having his business ziddress at the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs in Kinshasa". The warrant statrs that Mr. Yerodia is
charged with being "the perpetrator or CO-perpetritor"o f:
Crimes under international law constiiuting grave breaches
"-
causing harm by act or omission to perssns and property protected by the Conventions signed at Geni:va on 12 August 1949
and by Additional Protocols 1 and II to those Conventions
(Article 1, paragraph 3, of the Law of 16 .lune 1993, as amended
by the Law of 10 February 1999 concerning the punishment of
serious violations of international humaiiitarian law)
Crimes against humanity (Article 1, paragraph 2, of the Law of
-
16 June 1993, as amended by the Law of 10 February 1999 concerning the punishment of serious violations of international
humanitarian law)."
The warrant refers to "various speeches inciting racial hatred" and to
"particularly virulent remarks" allegedly made b:~M r. Yerodia during
"public addresses reported by the media" on 4 August and 27 August
1998. It adds:
"These speeches allegedly had the effect of inciting the population
to attack Tutsi residents of Kinshasa: there were dragnet searches,
manhunts (the Tutsi enemy) and lynchings.
The speeches inciting racial hatred thus arc: said to have resulted
in several hundred deaths, the internment of 7 utsis, summary executions, arbitrary arrests and unfair trials."
68. The warrant fiirther states that "the position of Minister for Foreign Affairs currently held by the accused does not entai1 immunity from
jurisdiction and enfc)rcement". The investigating judge does, however,
observe in the warrant that "the rule concerning the absence of immunity
under humanitarian law would appear . . . to reqiiire some qualification
in respect of immuni ty from enforcement" and ex Aains as follows :
"Pursuant to the general principle of fairnt ss in judicial proceedings, immunity from enforcement must, in Our view, be accorded to
al1 State representatives welcomed as such onco the territory of Belgium (on 'officia1 visits'). Welcoming such foreign dignitaries as
official representatives of sovereign States i~ivolvesn ot only relations between individuals but also relations between States. This
implies that suchi welcome includes an undertaking by the host State
and its various components to refrain froni taking any coercive
measures against its guest and the invitation cannot become a pretext for ensnaring the individual concerned in what would then have
to be labelled a trap. In the contrary case, failure to respect this

[Source edition page 30]

undertaking could give rise to the host State':. international responsibility."
69. The arrest warrant concludes with the following order
"We instruct and order al1 bailiffs and ageiits of public authority
who may be so required to execute this arrest warrant and to conduct the accused to the detention centre in Forest;
We order the warden of the prison to receive the accused and to
keep him (her) in custody in the detention c:ntre pursuant to this
arrest warrant;
We require al1 those exercising public authority to whom this warrant shall be shown to lend al1 assistance in e~ecutingit ."
70. The Court notes that the issuance, as such, of the disputed arrest
warrant represents ari act by the Belgian judicial kuthorities intended to
enable the arrest on Belgian territory of an incuml~entM inister for Foreign Affairs on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity. The
fact that the warrant is enforceable is clearly apparent from the order
given to "al1 bailiffs and agents of public authority . . . to execute this
arrest warrant" (see paragraph 69 above) and fron the assertion in the
warrant that "the position of Minister for Foreign Affairs curreritly held
by the accused does not entai1 iminunity from jurisdiction and enforcement". The Court notes that the warrant did admittedly make an exception for the case of a11 officia1 visit by Mr. Yerodi;,. to Belgium, and that
Mr. Yerodia never suffered arrest in Belgium. The Court is bound, however, to find that, given the nature and purpose of' the warrant, its mere
issue violated the imrnunity which Mr. Yerodia eiijoyed as the Congo's
incumbent Minister for Foreign Affairs. The Court accordingly concludes that the issue csf the warrant constituted a lriolation of an obligation of Belgiuin towards the Congo, in that it failecl to respect the immunity of that Minister and, more particularly, infringed the immunity from
criminal jurisdiction and the inviolability then eîjoyed by him under
international law.
71. The Court also notes that Belgium admit: that the purpose of
the international circ~ulutiono f the disputed arrest ~varranwt as "to establish a legal basis for the arrest of Mr. Yerodia . . . abroad and his subsequent extradition to Belgium". The Respondent maintains, however,
that the enforcement of the warrant in third Statr:s was "dependent on
some further prelimiiiary steps having been taken" and that, given the
"inchoate" quality of the warrant as regards thirci States, there was no
"infringe[ment of] thie sovereignty of the [Cong~~]"I.t further points
out that no Interpol Red Notice was requestetl until 12 September
2001, when Mr. Yeraldia no longer held ministerial office.
The Court cannot subscribe to this view. As ir the case of the warrant's issue, its interriational circulation from Juni: 2000 by the Belgian
authorities, given its nature and purpose, effectively infringed Mr. Yero-

[Source edition page 31]

dia's immunity as tht: Congo's incumbent Ministcr for Foreign Affairs
and was furthermore liable to affect the Congo's conduct of its international relations. Since: Mr. Yerodia was called upon in that capacity to
undertake travel in the performance of his duties, ihe mere international
circulation of the warrant, even in the absence of "further steps" by Belgium, could have resiilted, in particular, in his arrest while abroad. The
Court observes in this respect that Belgium itself cites information to the
effect that Mr. Yerodia, "on applying for a visa tcl go to two countries,
[apparently] learned that he ran the risk of being arrested as a result of
the arrest warrant issued against him by Belgium", adding that "[tlhis,
moreover, is what the [Congo] . . . hints when it writes that the arrest
warrant 'sometimes forced Minister Yerodia to travel by roundabout
routes"'. Accordingly, the Court concludes that ihe circulation of the
warrant, whether or not it significantly interfered with Mr. Yerodia's diplomatic activity, con:;tituted a violation of an obligation of Belgium
towards the Congo, in that it failed to respect the inimunity of the incumbent Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Congo and, more particularly,
infringed the immunity from criminal jurisdiction and the inviolability
then enjoyed by him i~nderin ternational law.
72. The Court will i~owad dress the issue of the rcmedies sought by the
Congo on account of Belgium's violation of the above-mentioned rules of
international law. In its second, third and fourth submissions, the Congo
requests the Court to adjudge and declare that:
"A formal finding by the Court of the unlawfulness of [the issue
and international circulation of the arrest w;irrant] constitutes an
appropriate form of satisfaction, providing reparation for the consequent moral injury to the Democratic Repu1)lic of the Congo;
The violations of international law underlyirig the issue and international circulation of the arrest warrant of 1 April 2000 preclude
any State. including Belgium, from executing it;
Belgium shall be required to recall and cancel the arrest warrant
of 11 April 2000 and to inform the foreign authorities to whom the
warrant was circiilated that Belgium renouncez its request for their
co-operation in executing the unlawful warrant."
73. In support of tl-iose submissions, the Congo :isserts that the termination of the official duties of Mr. Yerodia in no way operated to efface
the wrongful act and the injury flowing from it, which continue to exist.
It argues that the warrant is unlawful al? initio, that "[ilt is fundamentally
flawed" and that it carinot therefore have any legal i:ffect today. It points

[Source edition page 32]

ARREST WARRANT (JUDGMENT) 3 1
out that the purpose of its request is reparation for the injury caused,
requiring the restoration of the situation which would in al1 probability
have existed if the said act had not been comnitted. It States that,
inasmuch as the wrongful act consisted in an intr:rnal legal instrument,
only the "withdrawal" and "cancellation" of the latter can provide appropriate reparation.
The Congo further emphasizes that in no way is it asking the Court
itself to withdraw or cancel the warrant, nor to determine the means
whereby Belgium is tcs comply wit1.i its decision. It :xplains that the withdrawal and cancellation of the warrant, by the means that Belgium deems
most suitable. "are riot means of enforcement oi' the judgment of the
Court but the requeijted measure of legal repara ion/restitution itself".
The Congo maintains that the Court is consequently only being requested
to declare that Belgium, by way of reparation for i he injury to the rights
of the Congo, be recluired to withdraw and canc~:l this warrant by the
means of its choice.
74. Belgium for its part maintains that a findinp by the Court that the
immunity enjoyed by Mr. Yerodia as Miriister for Foreign Affairs had
been violated would in no way entai1 an obligaticn to cancel the arrest
warrant. It points out that the arrest warrant is s il1 operative and that
"there is no suggestion that it presently infringes the immunity of the
Congo's Minister for Foreign Affairs". Belgium considers that what the
Congo is in reality asking of the Court in its third and fourth final submissions is that the Court should direct Belgium as to the method by
which it should give effect to a judgment of the Court finding that the
warrant had infringecl the immunity of the Congo'; Minister for Foreign
Affairs.
75. The Court has already concluded (see parapraphs 70 and 71) that
the issue and circulation of the arrest warrant of 11 April 2000 by the
Belgian authorities failed to respect the immunity c<ft he incumbent Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Congo and, more particularly, infringed
the immunity from criminal jurisdiction and the involability then en-joyed
by Mr. Yerodia under international law. Those acts engaged Belgium's
international responsibility. The Court considers that the findings so
reached by it constitute a form of satisfaction whic h will make good the
moral injury complaii~edo f by the Congo.
76. However, as the Permanent Court of Interr ational Justice stated
in its Judgment of 13 September 1928 in the case concerning the Fcrctoi
at C'horzciw :
"[tlhe essential pi-inciple contained in the actuil notion of an illegal
act - a principle which seems to be estab1i;hed by international
practice and in particular by the decisions of 2 rbitral tribunals is
-
that reparation inust, as far as possible, wipe out al1 the conse-

[Source edition page 33]

quences of the illegal act and reestablish the :situation which would,
in al1 probabilit:~,h ave existed if that act hacl not been committed"
(P.C.I .J., Series A, No. 17, p. 47).
In the present case, "the situation which would, in al1 probability, have
existed if [the illegal act] had not been committed" cannot be re-established merely by a fiinding by the Court that the arrest warrant was unlawful under international law. The warrant is still extant, and remains
unlawful, notwithstanding the fact that Mr. Yersdia has ceased to be
Minister for Foreign Affairs. The Court accordin:ly considers that Belgium must, by means of its own choosing, cancel the warrant in question
and so inform the auithorities to whom it was circulated.
77. The Court seel, no need for any further rerredy: in particular, the
Court cannot, in a judgment ruling on a dispute bitween the Congo and
Belgium, indicate wkiat that judgment's implications might be for third
States, and the Court cannot therefore accept thc Congo's submissions
on this point.
78. For these reasons,
(1) (A) By fifteen votes to one,
Rejects the objections of the Kingdom of Belgi~mre lating to jurisdiction, mootness and admissibility;
IN FAVOUPRr:e sidenl Guillaume: Vice-P uesident Shi ; Judges Ranjeva, Herczegh. Fleischhauer, Koroma, Vereshchetin, Higgins, Parra-Aranguren,
Kooijmans. Rezek, Al-Khasawneh, Buergenthal; Jucfgrs ad hoc Bula-
Bula. Van den Wyngaert;
AGAINST: Jirdge Oda :,
(B) By fifteen votes to one,
Find.~t hat it has jurisdiction to entertain the Application filed by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on 17 October 2000;
IN ~AVOUPrRes:i dent Guillaume; Vicc-Presiderzt Shi Judges Ranjeva, Herczegh, Fleischhauer, Koroma, Vereshchetin, Higgins, Parra-Aranguren,
Kooijmans, Rezek., Al-Khasawneh, Buergenthal Jirdges ad hoc Bula-
Bula, Van den Wyngaert;
AGAINSJtTrd: ge Oda;
(C) By fifteen votes to one,
Finds that the Application of the Democratic Re~ublico f the Congo is
not without object and that accordingly the case i: not moot;
IN FAVOUPKr:e sident Guillaume; Vice-President Shi. Judg~sR anjeva. Herczegh, Fleischhauer, Koroma, Vereshchetin, Hig:ins, Parra-Aranguren,

[Source edition page 34]

Kooijmans, Rezek, Al-Khasawneh, Buergenthal; Judges ad hoc Bula-
Bula, Van den Wyngaert;
AGAINST : Judge Oda ;
(D) By fifteen votes to one,
Fin& that the Application of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is admissible;
IN FAVOUK: President Guillaume; Vice-President Shi; Judges Ranjeva, Herczegh. Fleischhauer, Koroma, Vereshchetin, Higgins. Parra-Aranguren,
Kooijmans, Rezelc, Al-Khasawneh. Buergenthal; Judges ad hoc Bula-
Bula, Van den Wyngaert;
AGAINST : Jz~rigeO da ;
(2) By thirteen votes to three,
Finds that the issue against Mr. Abdulaye Yerodia Ndombasi of the
arrest warrant of 11 ,4pril 2000, and its internatio~ialc irculation, constituted violations of a legal obligation of the Kingdom of Belgium towards
the Democratic Repuiblic of the Congo, in that thvy failed to respect the
immunity from crimirial jurisdiction and the inviola Aity which the incumbent Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo enjoyed under international law;
rN FAVOCR : Presiclent Guillaume; Vice-President Shi, Judges Ranjeva, Herczegh, Fleischhauer, Koroma, Vereshchetin, Higgins, Parra-Aranguren,
Kooijmans, Rezek, Buergenthal ; Judge ad hoc Biila-Bula ;
AGAIN\JTir:c1 ge.c Oda, Al-Khasawneh; Judge ad hoc Van den Wyngaert;
(3) By ten votes to six,
Finds that the Kingdom of Belgium must, t'y means of its own
choosing, cancel the arrest warrant of 11 April 2Ci00 and so inform the
authorities to whom lhat warrant was circulated.
FAVOIJR : Presi~i'ent Guillaun~e;V ice-Pre.~identS hi Judge., Ranjeva, Herczegh, Fleischhauer, Koroma. Vereshchetin, Parra-Aranguren, Rezek;
Judgb'e ad hoc Bula-Bula ;
AGAINSJTu:~ /ge.O~d a, Higgins, Kooijmans, Al-Khasawneh, Buergenthal;
Jutlge ad hoc Van den Wyngaert.
Done in French anid in English, the French text I~einga uthoritative, at
the Peace Palace, The Hague, this fourteenth day of February, two thousand and two, in three copies, one of which will be placed in the archives
of the Court and the others transmitted to the Govc:rnment of the Demo-

[Source edition page 35]

cratic Republic of the Congo and the Government of the Kingdom of
Belgium, respectively.
(Signed) Gilbert GUILLAUME,
President.
(Signed) Philippe COUVREUR,
Registrar.
President GUILLAUaMppEe nds a separate opinion to the Judgment of
the Court; Judge ODAa ppends a dissenting opinion to the Judgment of
the Court; Judge RAN.IEVaApp ends a declaration IO the Judgment of the
Court; Judge KOROMAap pends a separate opinic~nt o the Judgment of
the Court; ~udgesH IGGINSK,O OIJMAaNnSd BCERGENTHaAppLe nd a joint
separate opinion to the Judgment of the Court; Jiidge REZEKap pends a
separate opinion to ithe Judgment of the Court; ludge AL-KHASAWNEH
appends a dissenting opinion to the Judgment of the Court; Judge
ad hoc BULA-BULaApp ends a separate opinion to the Judgment of the
Court; Judge rid hoc VAND EN WYNGAERaTpp ends a dissenting opinion
to the Judgment of tlhe Court.
(Znitiulled) G.G.
(Znitiulled) Ph.C.
