ILIA NORMALIZED LEGAL TEXT

Document ID: icj-corfu-channel-1949-merits
Title: Corfu Channel (United Kingdom v. Albania) Merits Judgment
Chinese title: 科孚海峡案实体判决
Issuing body: International Court of Justice
Official source: https://www.icj-cij.org/sites/default/files/case-related/1/001-19490409-JUD-01-00-EN.pdf
Database version: public-international-law-v1.0.1-normalized-2026.09.24

NOTICE
This is an ILIA-generated normalized text for offline legal research.
It is not an official edition. Source-edition page markers are retained
only as factual verification locators. Verify quotations against the
official source linked above.

========================================================================

[Source edition page 1]

COUR INTERNATIONALE DE JUSTICE
RECUEIL
DES ARRÊTS, AVIS CONSULTATIFS ET ORDONNANCES
AFFAIRE D U DETROIT
DE C O R F O U
(FOND)
ARRET DU 9 AVRIL 1949
INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
REPORTS
OF
JUDGMENTS, ADVISORY OPINIONS AND ORDERS
T H E CORFU
CHANNEL CASE
(MERITS)
jttbGlMENT OF APRIL 9th, 1949
LEYDE Il LEY DEN
SOCIÉTÉ D'ÉDITIONS A. W. SIJTHOFF'S
A. W. SIJTHOFF PUBLISHING COMPANY

[Source edition page 2]

Le présent arrêt doit être cité comme suit :
« A$aire du Dklroit & CorJou, Arrêt dzl g avril 1949 :
C. I. J. Rec~cez~ZI H~, p . 4.
))
This Judgment should be cited as foiiows :
"Corfic ChanneZ case, Judgment of April gth, 1949 :
I.C.J . Reports 1949, P. 4."

[Source edition page 3]

INTERNATIONAL COUI2T OF JUSTICE
YEAR 1949. 1949.
April 9th.
General List
April 9tb, 1949. No. 1.
THE CORFU
CHANNEL CASE
(MERITS)
International responsibility for explosion of mines in territorial
waters.--Connivance with another State ; 'midence.-Minelaying by
persons unknown.-Knowledge of minelaying by State party.to proceedings : control of territory as ground for responsibility ;i ts influence on
the choice of means of proof; indirect midence, concordant inferences
of tact.-Breach of obligations resulting from knowledge of minelaying,
gvounds for responsibi1ity.-Court's jurisdiction to assess amount of
compensation ;i nterpretation of Special Agreement ;s ubsequent attitude
of Parties.
Right of passage of warships in time of peace through Straits connecting two parts of the high seas.-International custom.-Straits in which
right of passage exists.-North Corfu Channel.-Innocent passage ;
purpose of passage and manner of its execution.-Production of documents at Court's request ;r efusa1 to produce ; Article 49 of Statute of
Court and Article 54 of Rules.-Minesweeping undertaken in territorial waters contrary to wish of territorial State ;j ustification derived
from theory of intervention and notion of self-he1p.-Violation of territorial sovereignty ; international responsibility ; satisfaction in form
of a declaration by the Court of violation of right.
JUDGMENT
Present : Acting President GUERRER;O President BASDEVAN;T
Judges ALVAREZF, ABELA,H ACKWORTHW, INIARSKI,
ZORIEIC,D E VISSCHERS,i r Arnold MCNAIRK, LAESTAD,
BADAWIP ASHA,K RYLOVR, EAD,H SU MO, AZEVED;O
M. EEER, Judge ad hoc.

[Source edition page 4]

In the Corfu Channel case,
between
the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, represented by :
Sir Eric Beckett, K.C.M.G., K.C., Legal Adviser to the Foreign
Office, as Agent and Counsel, assisted by
The Right Honourable Sir Hartley Shawcross, K.C., M.P.,
Attorney-General, replaced on November I jtfi, 1948, by
Sir Frank Soskice, K.C., M.P., Solicitor-General ;
Mr. C. H. M. Waldock, Professor of international law in the
University of Oxford,
Mr. R. O. Wilberforce,
Mr. J. Mervyn Jones, and
Mr. M. E. Reed (of the Attorney-General's Office), members
of the English Bar, as Counsel,
the Government of the People's Republic of Albania, represented by :
M. Kahreman Ylli, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary of Albania in Paris, as Agent, replaced on
February 14th, 1949, by
M. Behar Shtylla, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of Albania in Paris, assisted by
M. Pierre Cot, Profssseur agrégé of the Faculties of Law of
France, and
Maître Joe Nordmann, of the Paris Bar, as Counsel; and
Slaitre Marc Jacquier, of the Paris Bar, and
Maître Paul Villard, of the Paris Bar, as Advocates.
composed as above,
delivers the following judgment :
By a Judgment delivered on March 25th, 1948 (I.C. J. Reports 1947-
1948, p. 15), in the Corfu Channel case, in proceedings instituted on
May zznd, 1947, by an application of the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland against the Government of the People's Republic of Albania, the Court gave its decision
5

[Source edition page 5]

THE COR^ CHANNEL CASE (MERITS). 6
on the Preliminary Objection filed on December gth, 1947, by the
latter Government. The Court rejected the Objection and decided
that proceedings on the merits should continue, and fixed the
time-limits for the filing of subsequent pleadings as follows : for
the Counter-Memorial of Albania : June qth, 1948 ; for the Reply
of the United Kingdom : August znd, 1948 ; for the Rejoinder of
Albania : September zoth, 1948.
Immediately after the delivery of the judgment, the Court was
notified by the Agents of the Parties of a Special Agreement,
which is as follows :
"The Government of the People's Republic of Albania, represented by their Agent Mr. Kahreman YUi, Envoy Extraordinary
and Minister Plenipotentiary of Albania at Paris ;
and
the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, represented by their Agent, Mr. W. E. Beckett,
C.M.G., K.C., Legal Adviser to the Foreign Office ;
Have accepted the present Special Agreement, which has been
drawn up as a result of the Resolution of the Security Council of
the 9th April, 1947, for the purpose of subrnitting to thi: International Court of Justice for decision the following questions :-
(1) 1s Albania responsible under international law for the
explosions which occurred on the zznd October 1946 in Albanian
waters and for the damage and loss of human life which resulted
from them and is there any duty to pay compensation ?
(2) Has the United Kingdom under international law violated
the sovereignty of the Albanian People's Republic by reason
of the acts of the Royal Navy in Albanian waters on the
~2ndO ctober and on the 12th and 13th November 1946 and is
there any duty to give satisfaction ?
The Parties agree that the present Special Agreement shall be
notified to the International Court of Justice immediately after
the delivery on the 25th March of its judgment on the question of
j urisdiction.
The Parties request the Court, having regard to the present
Special Agreement, to make such orders with regard to procedure,
in conformity wlth the Statute and the Rules of the Court, as the
Court may deem fit, after having consulted the Agents of the
Parties.
In witness whereof the above-mentioned Agents, being duly
authorized by their Governments to this effect, have signed the
present Special Agreement.
Done this 25th day of March, 1948, at midday, at The Hague,
in English and French. both texts being equally authentic, in a
single copy which shall be deposited with the International Court
of Justice."
On March 26th, 1948 (I.C. J. Reports 1947-1948, p. j3), the
Court made an Order in which it placed on record that the Special
6

[Source edition page 6]

Agreement now formed the basis of further proceedings before the
Court, and stated the questions submitted to it for decision. The
Court noted that the United Kingdom Government on October ~ s t ,
1947, that is within the time-limit fixed by the Court, had
filed a Meinorial with statements and submissions relating to the
incident that occured on October zznd 1946. It further noted
that the Agents, having been consulted, declared that they agreed
in requesting that the order and time-limits for the filing of the
subsequent pleadings as fixed by the Judgment of hlarch qth,
1948, be maintained. The Court confirmed this order and these
time-limits.
The Counter-Memorial, Iieply and Rejoinder were filed within
these limits. The case was thus ready for heanng on September zoth,
1948, and the commencement of the oral proceedings was then
fised for November 5th, 1948.
As the Court did not include upon the Bench a judge of Albanian
nationality, the Albanian Government availed itself during the
proceedings on the Preliminary Objection of the right provided
by Article 31, paragraph 2, of the Statute, and chose hf. Igor Daxner,
Doctor of Lam, President of a Chamber of the Supreme Court of
Czechoslovakia, as Judge ad hoc. On October z8th, 1948, the
Registrar was informed that Judge Daxner was prevented byreasons
of health from sitting or1 the date fixed. The Court decided on
November znd, 1948, to fix a time-limit expiring on November 7th,
within which the Albanian Government might notify the name of
the. person whom it wished to choose as Judge ad hoc in place
of Dr. Daxner, and to postpone the opening of the hearing until
November 9th. Within the time fixed the Albanian Government
designated 11. Bohuslav EEer, Doctor of Law and Professor in the
Faculty of Law at Brno, and delegate of the Czechoslovak Government to the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg.
Public sittings were held by the Court on the following dates :
November, 1948, 9th to ~zth1,5 th to rgth, zznd to 26th, 28th and
29th ; December, 1948,1st to 4th, 6th to t th, 13th, 14th and 17th ;
January, 1949, 17th to zznd. In the course of the sittings from
November 9th to ~gth1,9 48, and from January 17th to zznd, 1949,
the Court heard arguments by Sir Hartley Shawcross, K.C., Counsel,
Sir Eric Beckett, K.C., Agent and Counsel, and Sir Frank Soskice,
I<.C., Counsel, on behalf of the United Kingdom ; and by
M. Kahreman Ylli, Agent, and MM. J. Nordmann and Pierre Cot,
Counsel, on behalf of Albania. In the course of the sittings from
November zznd to December 14th, 1948, the Court heard the
evidence of the witnesses and experts called by each of the Parties
in reply to questions put to them in examination and cross-examination on behalf of the Parties, and by the President on behalf of
the Court or by a Member of the Court. The following perçons
gave evidence :

[Source edition page 7]

Ca-lled by the United Kingdom :
Commander E. R. D. Sworder, O.B.E., D.S.C., Royal Naval
Volunteer Reserve, as witness and expert ;
Karel Kovacic, former Lieutenant-Commander in the Yugoslav
Navy, as witness ;
Captain IV. H. Selby, D.S.C., Royal Navy, as witness ;
Commander R. T. Paul, C.B.E., Royal Navy, as witness;
Lieutenant-Commander P. K. Lankester, Royal Navy, as witness
and expert ;
Commander R. Mestre, French Navy, as-witness ;
Commander Q. P. Whitford, O.B.E., Royal Navy, as witness
and expert ;
Called by Albania :
Captain Ali Shtino, Albanian Army, as witness ;
First Captain Aquile Pdena, Albanian Army, as witness ;
Xhavit Muço, former Vice-President of the Executive Cornmittee
of Saranda, as witness ;
Captain B. 1. Ormanov, Bulgarian Navy, as expert ;
Rear-Admira1 Raymond Moullec, French Navy, as expert.
Documents, including maps, photographs and sketches, were
?Xed by both Parties, and on one occasion by the Parties jointly,
both as annelIes to the pleadings, and after the close of the written
proceedings. On one occasion during the sittings when a photostat
of an extract 'from a document was submitted, the Court, on November qth, 1948, made a decision in which it reminded both
Parties of the provisions of Article 48 and Article 43, paragraph I,
of the Rules of Court ; held that the document in question could be
received only if it were presented in an original and complete form ;
ordered that al1 documents which the Parties intended to use should
previously be filed in the Registry ; and reserved the right to
inform the Parties later which of these documents should be
presented in an original, and which in certified true copy, form.
Another decision as to the production of a senes of new documents was given by the Court on December xoth, 1948. This
decision noted that the Parties were agreed as to the production
of certain of these documents and that certain others were
withdrawn ; authonzed the production of certain other documents ;
lastly, in the case of one of these documents, the examination
8

[Source edition page 8]

THE CORFD CHt\NPIEI, CASE (IIERITS) 9
of which had been subjected to certain conditions, the Court's
decision placed on record the consent of the other Party to its
production and, in view of that consent, permitted its production,
having regard to the special circumstances ; but the Court expressly
stated that this permission could not form a precedent for the
future l.
By an Order of December 17th, 1948, the Court, having regard
to the fact that certain points had been contested between the
Parties which made it necessary to obtain an expert opinion,
defined these points, and entrusted the duty of giving the expert
opinion to a Committee composed of Commodore J. Bull of the
Royal Korwegian Navy, Commodore S. A. Forshell of the Royal
Swedish Kavy, and, Lieutenant-Commander S. J. Elfferich
of the Royal Netherlands Navy. These Experts elected Commodore Bull as their chairman, and filed their Report on
January Sth, 1949, within the prescribed time-limit. By a decision
read at a public sitting on January 17th, the Court requested
the Experts to proceed to Sibenik in Yugoslavia and Saranda in
Albania and to make on the land and in the waters adjacent to
these places any investigations and experiments that they might
consider useful with a view to verifying, completing, and, if
necessary, modifying the answers given in their report of January 8th. The Experts' second report-in which Commodore
Bull did not join, having been unable to niake the journey for
reasons of health-was filed on February 8th, 1949. On February ~otht,h ree members of the Court put questions to the Experts,
to which the Experts replied on February 12th.
At sittings held from January 17th to mnd, 1949, the representatives of the Parties had an opportunity of commenting orally
on the Experts' report of January 8th. They also filed written
observations concerning the further statements contained in the
Report of February 8th and the replies of February ~zth,a s
provided in the Court's decision of January 17th.
The Parties' submissions, as formulated by their Agents or
Counsel at the end of the hearings on the 18th, ~gth~, 1 satn d 22nd
Januaiy, 1949, are as follows :
Question (1) of the Special Agreement.
On behalf of the United Kingdom :
"The Governnient of the United Kingdom asks the Court in this case
to adjudge and declare as follows :
The list of documents in support produced by the Parties and accepted by
the Court will be found in Xnnex I to this Judginent.
2 See Annex 2 for the Experts' Report of Jariuarp Sth, the Court's decision of
January i;th, the Experts' second Report of February Xth, the qiiestions put by
three members of the Court, and the Experts' replies of February i2th.

[Source edition page 9]

That, on October aand, 1946, damage was caused to His
Majesty's ships Saumarez and Volage, which resulted in the
death and injuries of 44, and persona1 injuries to 42, British
officers and men by a minefield of anchored automatic mines
in the international highway of the Corfu Strait in an area
south-west of the Bay of Saranda ;
That the aforesaid minefield was laid between May 15th and
October zznd, 1946, by or with the connivance or knowledge
of the Albanian Government ;
That (alternatively to 2) the Albanian Government knew that
the said minefield was lying in a part of its territorial waters ;
That the Albanian Government did not notify the existence of
these mines as required by the Hague Convention VI11 of 1907
in accordance with the general principles of international law
and humanity ;
That in addition, and as an aggravation of the conduct of
Albania as set forth in Conclusions (3) and (4). the Albanian
Government, or Cts agents, knowing that His Majesty's ships
were going to make the passage through the North Corfu swept
channel, and being in a position to observe their approach, and
having omitted, as alleged in paragraph 4 of these conclusions,
to riotify the existence of the said mines, failed to warn His
Majesty's ships of the danger of the said mines of which the
Albanian Government or its agents were well aware ;
That in addition, and as a further aggravation of the conduct
of Albania as set forth in Conclusions (3), (4), and (5), the permission of the existence without notification of the minefield
in the North Corfu Channel, being an international highway,
was a violation of the right of innocent passage which exists
in favour of foreign vessels (whether warships or merchant
ships) through such an international highway ;
That the passage of His Majesty's ships through the North
Corfu Channel on October zznd, 1946, was an exercise of the
right of innocent passage, according to the law and practice of
civilized nations ;
That even if, for any reason, it is held that conclusion (7) is
not established, nevertheless, the Albanian Government is not
thereby relieved of its international responsibility for the damage
caused to the ships by reason of the existence of an unnotified
minefield of which it had knowledge ;
That in the circumstances set forth in the Memorial as summarized in the preceding paragraphç of these Conclusions, the
Albanian Government has committed a breach of its obligations
under international law, and is internationally responsible to
His Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom for the deaths,
injuries and àainage caused to His Majesty's ships and personnel, as set out more particularly in paragraph 18 of the Memorial
and the Annexes thereto ;

[Source edition page 10]

(IO) That the Albanian Government is under an obligation to the
Government of the United Kingdom to make reparation in
respect of the breach of its international obligations as aforesaid ;
That His Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom has.
(II)
as a result of the breach by the Albanian Government of its
obligations under international law, sustained the foiiobving
damage :
. . . . . .
Damage to H.M.S. Saurmrez L~~O,OOO
. . . . . .
Damage to H.M.S. Volage. 75,000
Compensation for the pensions and other
expenses incurred by the Government of
the United Kingdom in respect of the
.
deaths and injuries of naval personnel. 50,000
~875,000"
On behalf of the Albanian Government :
[Translation.]
Under the terms of the Special Agreement of March 25th, 1948,
"(1)
the following question has been submitted to the International
Court of .,T ustice :
*'IsA lbania responsible under international law for the explosions which occurred on the 22nd October 1946 in Albanian
waters and for the damage and loss of human life which resulted
£rom them and is there any duty to pay compensation ?'
The Court would not have jurisdiction, in virtue of this Special
.4greement, to decide, if the case arose, on the claim for the
assessment of the compensation set out in the submissions
of the United Kingdom Government.
It has not been proved that the mines which caused the acci-
(2)
dents of October zznd, 1946, were laid by Albania.
(3) It has not been proved that these mines were laid by a third
Power on behalf of Albania.
(4) It has not been proved that these mines were laid with the help
or acquiescence of Albania.
(5) It has not been proved that Albania knew, befote the incidents
of October zznd, 1946, that theçe mines were in her territorial
waters.
(6) Consequently, Albania cannot be declared responsible, under
international law, for the explosions which occurred on
October zznd, 1946, in Albanian waters, and for the damage
and loss of human life which resulted £rom them. Albania
owes no compensation to the United Kingdoin Government."
Question (2) of the Special Agreement.
On behalf of the Albanian Governrnent :
[Translation.]
"(1) Under the terms of the Special Agreement concluded on
March 25th, 1948, the International Court of Justice has before
it the following question :
II

[Source edition page 11]

'Has the United Kingdom under international law violated
the sovereignty of the Albanian People's Kepublic by reason
of the acts of the Royal Navy in Aibanian waters on the
22nd October and on the 12th and 13th November 1946, and is
there any duty to give satisfaction ?'
(2) The coastal State is entitled, in exceptional circumstances, to
regulate the passage of foreign warships through its territorial
waters.
(3) This rule is applicable to the North Corfu Channel.
(4) In October and November, 1946, there existed, in this area,
exceptional circumstances which gave the Albanian Government the right to require that foreign warships should obtain
previous authorization before passing through its territorial
waters.
(5) The passage of several British warships through Albanian territorial waters on October zznd, 1946, without prcvious authorization, constituted a breach of international law.
(6) In any case that passage was not of an innocent character.
(7) The British naval authorities were not entitled to proceed, on
November 12th and 13th, 1946, to sweep mines in A!banian
territorial waters without the previous consent of the Albanian
authorities.
(8) The Court should find that, on both these occasions, the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland committed a breach of the rules of international law
and that the Albanian Government has a right to (Icmand that
it should give satisfaction therefor."
On hehcrlf of the United Kingdom Govcrnmcint :
"1 ask the Court to decide that on neither heatl of tlic, counterclaim has Albania made out her case, and that there is rio ground
for the Court to award nominal damages of one farthing or one
franc."
*
* *
By the first part of the Special Agreement, the following question
is submitted to the Court :
1s Albania responsible under international law for the
"(1)
cxplosions which occurred on the 22nd October 1946 in Albanian
waters and for the tlamage and loss of human life which resulted
from them and is there any duty to pay compensation ?"
On October zznd, 1946, a squadron of British warships, the
cruisers Mauritius and Leander and the destroyers Saumarez and
I'olage, left the port of Corfu and proceeded northward through
a channel previously suftpt for mines in the North Corfu Strait.
The cruiser Mauritius was leading, followed by the destroyer
Saumarez; at a certain distance therealter came the cruiser Leander
followed by the ciestroyclr Volage. Outside thc Bay of Saranda,
Saumarez btruck ;L rninc and was hcavily damaged. Volnga was

[Source edition page 12]

ordered to give her assistance and to take her in tow. Whilst
towing the damaged ship, Volage struck a mine and was much
damaged. Nevertheless, she succeeded in towing the other ship
back to Corfu.
Three weeks later, on November 13th, the North Corfu Channel
was swept by British minesweepers and twenty-two moored mines
were cut. Two mines were taken to Malta for expert examination.
During the minesweeping operation it was thought that the mines
were of the German GR type, but it was subsequently established
that they were of the German GY type..
The Court will consider first whether the two explosions that
occurred on October zznd, 1946, were caused by mines belonging
to the minefield discovered on Novemter 13th.
It was pointed out on behalf of the United Kingdom Government
that this minefield had been recently laid. This was disputed in
the Albanian pleadings but was no longer disputed during the
liearing. One of the Albanian Counsel expressly recognized that
the minefield had been recently laid, and the other Counsel subsequently made a similar declaration. It was further asserted on
behalf of the Albanian Government that the minefield must have
been laid after October 22nd ; this would make it impossible at
the same time to mainiain that the minefield was old. The
documents produced by the United Kingdom Governmerit and
the statements made by the Court's Experts and based on these
documents show that the minefield had been recerttlv laid. This is
- -
now established.
The United Kingdom Government contended that the mines
which struck the two ships on October zznd were part of this
minefield.
This was contested by the Albanian Government, which
argued that these mines may have been floating mines, coming
from old minefields in the vicinity, or magnetic ground mines,
magnetic moored mines, or German GR mines. It was also contested by them that the explosions occurred in the previously
swept channel at the place where the minefield was dircovered.
The Albanian Government also contended that the minefield
was laid after Octcber 2211d, between that date and the minesweeping operation on 12-13th November.
On -the evidence produced, the Court finds that the following
facts are established :
In October, IW, the North Corfu Channel was swept by the
British Navy and no mines were found in the channel thus swept,
whereupon -the existence of a safe route through the Channe!
was announced in November 1944. In January and February,

[Source edition page 13]

THE COKFU CHANNEL CASE (BIERITS) I4
1945, the Channel was check-swept by the British Navy \vitil negative
results. That the British Admiralty must have considered the
Channel to be a safe route for navigation is sho~nby the fact
that on May ~jth,1 946, it sent two British cruisers and on
October zznd a squadron through the C.hanne1 without any
special measlires of precaution against danger from nloored
mines. It was in this swept channel that the minefield was
discovered on November 13th, 1946.
It is further proved by evidence produced by the United
Kingdom Govemment that the mining of Snzrnrarez and 1,'olage
occurred in Albanian territorial n~ters,ju st at the place in the
swept channel where the minefield was found, as indicated on
the chart forming Annex g to the United Kingdom hlemorial.
This is confirmed by the Court's Experts, ~ h coon sider it to be
free from any doubt that the two ships were mined in approxinlately the position indicated on this chart.
It is established by the evidence of witnesses that the minefield
consisted of moored contact mines of the German GY type. It
is further shown by the nature of the damage sustained hy the
two ships, and confirmed by witnesses and experts, that it could
not have been caused by floating mines, magnetic ground mines,
magnetic moored mines, or German GR mines. The experts of
the Court have stated that the nature of the damage excludes
the faintest possibility of its cause being a floating mine ; nor
could it have been caused by a ground mine. They also expressed
the view that the damage must have been caused by the explosion
of moored contact mines, each having a charge of approximately
600 lbs. of explosives, and that the two ships struck mines of
the same type as those which were swept on November 13th, 1946.
The Albanian Government put forward a suggestion that the
minefield discovered on November 13th may have been laid after
October zznd, so that the explosions that occurred on this latter
date would not have been caused by mines from the field in
question. But it brought no evidence in support of this supposition. As it has been established that the explosions could
only have been due to moored mines having an explosive charge
similar to that contained in GY mines, there would, if the Albanian
contention were true, have been at least two mines of this nature
in the channel outside the Bay of Saranda, in spite of the sweep in
October 1941 and the check-sweeps in January and February 1945 ;
and these mines would have been struck by the two vessels at
poi~itsf airly close to one another on October 2211d, 1946. Such
a supposition is too improbable to be accepted.
14

[Source edition page 14]

The Court consequenrly finds that the following facts are
established. The two ships were mined in Albanian territorial
waters in a previously swept and check-swept channel just at
the place where a newly laid minefield consisting of moored
contact German GY mines was discovered three weeks later.
The damage sustained by the ships was inconsistent with damage
which could have been caused by floating mines, magnetic ground
mines, magnetic moored mines, or German GR mines, but its
nature and extent were such as would be caused by mines of
the type found in the minefield. In such circumstances the
Court arrives at the conclusion that the explosions were due to
mines belonging to that minefield.
Such are the facts upon which the Court nust, in order to reply
to the first question of the Special Agreement, give judgment as to
Albania's responsibility for the explosions on October zznd, 1946,
and for the damage and loss of human life which resulted, and for
the compensation, if any, due in respect of such damage and loss.
To begin with, the foundation for Albania's responsibility, as
alleged by the United Kingdom, must be considered. On this
subject, the mzin position of the United Kingdom is to be found
in its submission No. 2 : that the minefield which caused the explosions was laid between May 15th, 1946, and October zznd, 1946,
by or with the connivance or knowledge of the Albânian Government.
The Court considered first the various groundç for responsibility
alleged in this submission.
In fact, although the United Kingdom Govemment never abandoned its contention that Albania herself laid the mines, very little
attempt was made by t5e Government to demonstrate this point.
In the written Reply, the United Kingdom Govemment takes note
of the Albanian Government's forma1 statement that it did not lay
the mines, and was not in a position to do so, as Albania possessed
no navy ; and that, on the whole Albanian littoral, the Albanian
authorities only had a few launches and motor boats. In the light
of these statenlents, the Albanian Government was called upon,
in the Reply, to disclose the circumstances in which two Yugoslav
war vessels, the Mljet and the Meljine, carrying contact mines of
the GY type, sailed routhward from the port of Sibenik on or about
October 18th, and proceeded to the Corfu Channel The United
Kingdom Government, having thus indicated the argument upon
15

[Source edition page 15]

which it was thenceforth to concentrate, stated that it proposed
to show that the said warships, with the knowledge and connivance
of the Albanian Government, laid mines in the Corfu Channel just
before October zznd, 1946. The facts were presented in the same
light and in the same language in the oral reply by ~ounseflo r the
United Kingdom Government at the sittings on January 17th
and 18th, 1949.
Although the suggestion that the minefield was laid by Albania
was repeated in the United Kingdom statement in Court on
January 18tii, 1949, and in thé final submissions read in Court on
the same day, this suggestion was in fact hardly put forward at
that time except pro memoria, and no evidence in support was
furnished.
In these circumstances, the Court need pay no further attention
to this matter.
The Court now comes to the second alternative argument of the
United Kingdom Govemment, namely, that the minefield was laid
with the connivance of the Albanian Government. According to
this argument, the minelaying operation was carried out by tw70
Yugoslav warships at a date prior to October zznd, but very near
that date. This would imply collasion between the Albanian and
the Yugoslav Governments, consisting either of a request by the
Albanian Govemment to the Yugoslav Government for assistance,
or of acquiescence by the Albanian authoritieo in the laying of the
mines.
In proof of this collusion, the United Kingdom Government
relied on the evidence of Lieutenant-Commander Kovacic; as shown
in his affidavit of October 4th, 1948, and in his statements in Court
at the public sittings on November 24th, 25th, 26th and 27th, 1948
The Court gave much attention to this evidence and to the documentary information supplied by the Parties. It supplemented
and checked al1 this information by sending two experts appointed
by it to Sibenik : Commodore S. A. Forshell and Lieutenant-
Commander S. J. W. Elfferich.
Without deciding as to the persona1 sincerity oi the witness
Kovacic, or the truth of what he said, the Court finds that the facts
stated by the witness from his persona1 knowledge are not sufficient
to prove what the United Kingdom Government considered them
to prove. His ayegations that he saw mines being loaded upon
two Yugoslav minesweepers at Sibenik and that these two vessels
departed from Sibenik about October 18th and returned a few
days after the occurrence of the explosions do not suffice to constitute decisive legal proof that the mines were laid by these two
vessels in Albanian waters off Saranda. The statements attributed
16

[Source edition page 16]

by the witness Kovacic to third parties, of which the Court has
received no persona1 and direct confirmation, can be regarded only
as allegations falling short of conclusive evidence. A charge of
such exceptional gravity against a State would require a degree of
certainty that has not been reached here.
Apart from Kovacic's evideqce, the United Kingdom Government endeavoured to prove coliusion between Albania and Yugoslavia by certain presumptions of fact, or circumstantial evidence,
such as the possession, at that time, by Yugoslavia, and by no
other neighbouring State, of GY mines, and by the bond of close
political and military alliance between Albania and Yugoslavia,
resulting from the Treaty of friendship and mutual assistance
signed by those two States on July gth, 1946.
The Court considers that, even in so far as these facts are established, they lead to no firm conclusion. It has not been legaliy
established that Yugoslavia possessed any GY mines, and the
origin of the mines laid in Albanian territorial waters remains a
mat ter for conjecture. It is' clear that the existence of a treaty,
such as that of July gth, 1946, however close may be the bonds
uniting its signatories, in no way leads to the conclusion that
they participated in a criminai act.
On its side, the Yugoslav Government, although not a party
to the proceedings, authorized the Albanian Govemment to
produce certain Yugoslav documents, for the purpose of refuting
the United Kingdom contention that the mines had been laid
by two ships of the Yugoslav Navy. As the Court was anxious
for fuli light to be thrown on the facts alleged, it did not refuse
to receive these documents. But Yugoslavia's absence from the
proceedings meant that these documents could only be admitted
as evidence subject to reserves, and the Court finds it unnecessary
to express an opinion upon their probative value.
The Court need not dwell on the assertion of one of the Counsel
for the Albanian Govemment that the minefield might have been
laid by the Greek Govemment. It is enough to Say that this
was a mere conjecture which, as Counsel himself admitted, was
based on no proof.
In the light of the information now available to the Court, the
authors of the minelaying remain unknown. In any case, the task
of the Court, as defined by the Special Agreement, is to decide
whether Albania is responsible, under international law, for the
explosions which occurred on October zznd, 1946, and to give
judgment as to the compensation, if any.
Finally, the United Kingdom Govemment put forward the
argument that, whoever the authors of the minelaying were, it
could not have been done without the Albanian Government's
knowledge.

[Source edition page 17]

It is clear that knou-leoge of the mineIaying cannot be imputed
to the Albanian Government by reason merely of the fact that
a minefield discovered in Albanian temtorial waters caused the
explosions of which the British warships were the victims. It
is true, as international practice shows, that a State on whose
territory or in whose waters an act contrary to international
law has occurred, may be called upon to give an explanation.
It is also true that that State cannot evade such a request by
limiting itself to a reply that it is ignorant of the circumstances
of the act and of its authors. The State may, up to a certain
point, be bound to supply particulars of the use made by it of
the means of information and inquiry at its disposal. But it
cannot be concluded from the mere fact of the control exercised
by a State over its territory and waters that that State necessarily
knew, or ought to have known, of any unlawful act perpetrated
therein, nor yet that it necessarily knew, or should have known,
the authors. This fact, by itself and apart from.other circumstances, neither involves prima facie resp~nsibility nor shifts
the burden of proof.
On the other hand, the fact of this exclusive temtorial control
exercised by a State within its frontiers has a bearing upon the
methods of proof available to establish the knowledge of that
State as to such events. By reason of this exclusive control,
the other State, the. victim of a breach of international law, is
often unable to furnish direct proof of facts giving rise to
responsibility. Such a State should be dowed a more liberal
recourse to inferences of fact and circumstantial evidence. This
indirect evidence is admitted in al1 systems of law, and its use
is recognized by international decisions. It must be regarded
as of special weight when it is based on a series of facts linked
together and leading logically to a single conclusion.
The Court must examine therefore whether it has ken established
by means of indirect evidence that Albania has knowledge of minelaying in her territorial waters independently of any connivance
on her part in this operation. The proof may be drawn from
inferences of fact, provided that they leave no room for reasonable
doubt. The elements of fact on which these inferences can be
based may differ from those which are relevant to the question of
connivance.
In the present case, two series of facts, which corroborate one
another, have to be considered : the first relates to Albania's
attitude before and after the disaster of October zznd, 1946 ; the
other concerns the feasibility of observing minelaying from the
Xlbanian coast.
I. It is clearly estabilshed that the Albanian Government
constantly kept a close watch over the waters of the North Corfu
Charinel, at any rate after May 1946. This vigilance is proved
18

[Source edition page 18]

THE CORFU CHANNEL CASE (MERITS) 19
by the declaration of the Albanian Delegate in the Security
Council on February ~gth,1 947 (Oficial Records of the Security
Council, Second Year, No. 16, p. 328), and especially by the
diplomatic notes of the Albanian Government concerning the
passage of foreign ships through its territorial waters. This
vigilance sometimes went so far as to involve the use of force :
for esample the gunfire in the direction of the British cruisers
Orion and Sztperb on May ~gth1, 946, and the shots fired at the
U.N.R.R.A. tug and barges on October 29th, 1946, as established
by the affidavit of Enrico Bargellini, which was not seriously
contested.
The Albanian Government's notes are al1 evidence of its intention
to keep a jealous watch on its temtorial waters. The note verbale
addressed to the United Kingdom on May z~st1,9 46, reveals the
existence of a "General Order", in execution of which the Coastal
Commander gave the order to fire in the direction of the British
cruisers. This same note formulates a demand that "permission"
shall be given, by the Albanian authorities, for passage through
territorial waters. The insistence on "formalities" and "permission" by Albania is repeated in the Albanian note of June 19th.
As the Parties agree that the minefield had been recently laid,
it must be concluded that the operation was carried out during
the period of close watch by the Albanian authorities in this sector.
This conclusion renders the Albanian Govemment's assertion of
ignorance a priori somewhat improbable.
The Court also noted the reply of Captain Ali Shtino to a
question put by it ; this reply shows that the witness, who had
been called on to replace the Coastal Defence Commander for a
period of thirteen to fifteen days, immediately before the events
of October zznd, had received the following order: "That the
look-out posts must inform me of every movement [in the Corfu
Channel], and that no action would be taken on our part."
The telegrams sent by the Albanian Government on November 13th and November 27th, 1946, to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, at a time when that Government was fully aware
of the discovery of the minefield in Albanian territorial waters,
are especially significant of the measures taken by the Albanian
Government. In the first telegram, that Government raised the
strongest protest against the movements and activity of British
naval units in its territorial waters on November 12th and 13th,
1946, without even mentioning the existence of a minefield in
these waters. In the second, it repeats its accusations against
the United Kingdom, without in any way protesting against the
laying of this minefield which, if effected without Albania's consent,
constituted a very serious violation of her sovereignty.
Another indication of the Albanian Govemment's knowledge
consists in the fact that that Govemment did not notify the

[Source edition page 19]

presence of mines in its waters, at the moment when it must have
known this, at the latest after the sweep on November 13th, and
further, whereas the Greek Government immediately appointed
a Commission to inquire into the events of October zznd, the
Albanian Govemment took no decision of such a nature, nor did
it proceed to the judicial investigation incumbent, in such a case,
on the territorial sovereign.
This attitude does not seem reconcilabIe with the alieged ignorance
of the Albanian authorities that the minefield had been laid in
Albanian territorial waters. It could be explained if the Albanian
Government, while knowing of the minelaying, desired the circumstances of the operation to remain secret.
2. As regards the possibility of observing minelaying from the
Albanian coast, the Court regards the following facts, relating to
the technical conditions of a secret minelaying and to the Albanian
surveillance, as particularly important.
The Bay of Saranda and the channel used by shipping through
the Strait are, from their geographical configuration, easily
watched ; the entrance of the bay is dominated by heights offenng
excellent observation points, both over the bay and over the
Strait ; whilst the channel throughout is close to the Albanian coast.
The laying of a minefield in these waters could hardly fail to have
been observed by the Albanian coastal defences.
On this subject, it must first be said that the minelaying operation itself must have required a certain time. The method adopted
required, according to the Experts of the Court, the methodical and
well thought-out laying of two rows of mines that had clearly a
combined offensive and defensive purpose : offensive, to prevent the
passage, through the Channel, of vessels drawing ten feet of water
or more ; defensive, to prevent vessels of the same draught frorn
entering the Bay of Saranda. The report of. the Experts reckons
the time that the minelayers would have been in the waters,
between Cape Kiephali and St. George's Monastery, at between
two and two and a haif hours. This is sufficient time to attract
the attention of the observation posts, placed, as the Albanian
Government stated, at Cape Kiephali and St. George's Monastery.
The facilities for observation from the coast are confirmed
by the two following circumstances : the distance of the nearest
mine from the coast was only 500 metres ; the minelayers must
have passed at not more than about 500 metres from the coast
between Denta Point and St. George's Monastery.
Being anxious to obtain any technical information that might
guide it in its search for the truth, the Court submitted the
following question to the Experts appointed by it :

[Source edition page 20]

"On the assumption that the mines discovered on November 13th, 1946, were laid at some date within the few preceàing
months, whoever may have laid them, you are requested to examine
the information availabie regarding (a) the number and the nature of
the mines, (b) the means for laying them, and (c) the time required
to do so, having regard to the different states of the sea, the conditions of the locality, and the different weather conditions, and to
ascertain whether it is possible in that way to draw any concl~~sions,
and. if so, what conclusions, in regard to :
(1) the means employed for laying the minefield discovered
on November 13th, 1946, and
(2) the possibility of mooring those mines with those means
without the Albanian authorities being aware of it, having
regard to the extent of the measures of vigilance existing in the
Saranda region."
As the first Report submitted by the Experts did not seen
entirely coaclusive, the Court, by a decision of January 17th, 1949,
asked the Experts to go to Saranda and to venfy, complete and,
if necessary, modify their answers. In this way, observations
were made and various expenments carned out on the spot,
in the presence of the experts of the Parties and of Albanian
officials, with a view to estimating the possibility of the minelaying having been observed by the Albanian look-mit posts.
On this subject reference must be made to a test of visibility
by night, carried out on the evening of January 28th, 1949, at
St. George's Monastery. A motor ship, 27 metres long, and
with no bridge, wheel-house, or funnel, and very low on the
water, was used. The ship was completely blacked out, and on
a moonlcss night, i.e., under the moçt favourable conditions for
avoiding discovery, it was clearly seen and heard from St. George's
Monastery. The noise of the motor was heard at a distance
of 1,800 metres, and the ship itself was sighted at 570 metres
and remained visible up éo about 1,900 metres.
The Experts' Report on this visit stated that :
"The Experts consider it to be indisputable that if a normal
look-out was kept at Cape Kiephali, Denta Point, and St. George's
Monastery, and if the look-oiits were equipped with binoculars as
has been stated, under normal weather conditions for this area,
the minelaying operations shown in Annex g to the United Kingdom Memorial must have been noticed by these coastguards."
The Court canriot fail to give great weight to the opinion of
the Experts who examined the locality in a manner giving every
guarantee of correct and impartial information. Apart from the
existence of a look-out post at Cape Denta, which hâs not been
proved, the Court, basing itself on the declarations of the Albanian
Government that look-out posts were stationed at Cape Kiephali
and St. George's Monastery, refers to the following conclusions
2 1

[Source edition page 21]

in the Experts' Report : (1) that in the case of minelaying from
the North towards the South, the minelayers would have been
seen from Cape Kiephali ; (2) in the case of minelaying from
the South, the minelayers would have been seen from Cape
Kiephali and St. George's Monastery.
From al1 the facts and observations mentioned above, the
Court draws the conclusion that the laying of the minefield which
caused the explosions on October zznd, 1946, could not have been
accomplished without the knowledge of the Albanian Government.
The obligations resulting for Albania from this knowledge are
not disputed between the Parties. Counsel for the Albanian
Government expressly recognized that [t[tvnnslatio?z"]i f Albania had
been informed of theuperation before the incidents of October zznd,
and in tirne to warn the British vessels and shipping in general
of the existence of mines in the Corfu Channel, her responsibility
would be involved.. . .".
The obligations incumbent upon the Albanian authorit ies
consisted in notifying, for the benefit of shipping in general, the
existence of a minefield in Albanian territorial waters and in
warning the approaching British warships of the imminent danger
to which the minefield exposed them. Such obligations are based,
not on the Hague Convention of 1907, No. VTII, which is applicable in time of war, but on certain general and well-recognized
principles, namely : elementary considerations of humanity, even
more exacting in peace than in war ; the principle of the freedom
of maritime communication ; and every State's obligation not to
allow knowingly its territory to be used for acts contrary to the
rights of other States.
In fact, Albania neither notified the existence of the minefield,
nor warned the British warships of the danger they were
approaching.
But Albania's obligation to notify shipping of the existence of
mines in her waters depends on her having obtained knowledge
of that fact in sufficient time before October zznd ; and the duty
of the Albanjan coastal authorities to warn the British ships depends
on the time' that elapsed between the moment that these ships
were reported and the moment of the first explosion.
On this subject, the Court makes the following observations.
As has already been stated, the Parties agree that the mines were
recently laid. It must be concluded that the minelaying, whatever
may have been its exact date, was done at a time when there
was a close Albanian surveillance over the Strait. If it be supposed that it took place at the last possible moment, i.e., in the
night of October zrst-zznd, the only conclusion to be drawn would

[Source edition page 22]

be that a general notification to the shipping of al1 States before
the time of the explosions would have been difficult, perhap-a even
impossible. But this would certainly not have prevented the
.Ilbanian authorities from taking, as they should have done, al1
necessary steps immediately to warn ships near the danger zone,
more especially thcse that were approaching that zone. X'hen
on October zznd about 13.00 hours the British warships were
reported by the look-out post at St. George's hlonastery to the
Commander of the Coastal Defences as approaching 'Cape Long,
it nas perfectly possible for the Albanian authorities to use the
interval of almost two hours that elapsed before the explosion
affecting Sairnznvez (14.53 hours or 14.55 hours) to warn the vessels
of the danger into which they were running.
In fact, nothing was attempted by the Albanian authorities to
prevent the disaster. These grave omissions in\-olve the international responsibility of Albania.
The Court therefore reaches the conclusion that Albania is
responsible under international law for the explosions which
occurred on October zznd, 1946, in Albanian waters, and for
the damage and loss of human life which resulted from them,
and that there is a duty iipon Albania to pay compensation to
the United Kingdom.
*
* *
In the final submissions contained in its oral reply, the United
Kingdom Government asked the Court to give judgment that,
as a result of the breach by the Albanian Govemment of its
obligations under international law, it had sustained damages
amounting to £87 5,000.
In the last oral statement submitted in its name, the Albanian
Government, for the first time, asserted that the Court would
ilot have jurisdiction, in virtue of the Special Agreement, to
assess the amount of compensation. No reason was given in
support of this new assertioc, and the United Kingdom Agent
did not açk leave to reply. The question of the Court's jurisdiction
was not argued between the Parties.
In the first question of the Special Agreement the Court is
asked :
(i) 1s Albania under international law responsible for the
explosions and for the darnage and loss of human life which
resulted from them, and
(ii) is there any duty to pay compensation ?
This text gives rise to certain doubts. If point (i) is answered
in the affirmative, it follows from the establishment of respons-

[Source edition page 23]

ibility that compensation is due, and it wodd be superfiuous
to add point (ii) unless the Parties had something else in mind
than a mere declaration by the Court that compensation is due.
It would indeed be incompatible with the generally accepted
rules of interpretation to admit that a provision of this sort
occurring in a special agreement should be devoid of purport
or effect. In this connexion, the Court refers to the views expressed
by the Permanent Court of International Justice with regard
to similar questions of interpretation. In Advisory Opinion
No. 13 of July 23rd, 1926, that Court said (Series B., No. 13,
p. 19) : "But, so far as concerns the specific question of competence now pending, it rnay suffice to observe that the Court,
in determining the nature and scope of a measure, must look to
its practical effect rather than to the predominant motive that
may be conjectured to have inspired it." In its Order of
August ~gth1,9 29, in the Free Zones case, the Court said (Series A.,
No. 22, p. 13) : "in case of doubt, the clauses of a special agreement
by which a dispute is referred to the Court must, if it does not
involve doing violence to their terms, be construed in a manner
enabling the clauses themselves to have appropriate effects"
The Court thinks it necessary to reier to the different stages
of the procedure. In its Resolution of April gth, 1947, the
Security Council recommended that the two Governments should
immediately refer "the dispute" to the Court. This Resolution
had without doubt for its aim the final adjustment of the whole
dispute. In pursuance of the Resolution, the Government of the
United Kingdom filed an Application in which the Court was
asked, iwter dia, to "determine the reparation or compensation",
and in its Memorial that Government stated the various sums
claimed. The Albanian Govemment thereupon submitted a
Preliminary Objection, which was rejected by the Court by its
Judgment of March 25th, 1948. Immediately after this judgment
nas delivered, the Agents of the Parties notified the Court of the
conclusion of a Special Agreement. Commenting upon this step
taken by the Parties, the Agent of the Albanian Government
said that in the circumstances of the present case a special
agreement on which "the whole procedure" should be based was
essential. He further said [translation] : "As 1 have stated on
several occasions, it has always been the intention of the Albanian
Govemment to respect the decision taken by the Security Council
on April gth, 1947, in virtue of \\-hich the present Special Agreement is submitted to the International Court of Justice."
Neither the Albanian nor the Cnited Kingdom Agent suggested
in any way that the Special Agreement had limited the competence
of the Court in this matter to a decision merely upon the pnnciple
of compensation or that the United Kingdom Government had
abandoned an important part of its original claim. The main
24

[Source edition page 24]

object both Parties had in mind when they concluded the Special
Agreement Ras to establish a complete equality between them by
replacing the original procedure based on a unilateral Application
by a procedure based on a Special Agreement. There is no suggestion that this change as to procedure was intended to involve any
change with regard to the merits of the British claim as originally
presented in the Application and Memorial. Accordingly, the
Court, after consulting the Parties, in its Order of Iiarch 26th, 1948,
maintained the United Kingdom's BZemonal, filed previously,
"with statements and submissions". These submissions included
the claim for a fixed sum of compensation.
The subsequent attitude of the Parties shows that it \vas not
their intention, by entering into the Special Agreement, to preclude
the Court from fixing the amount of the compensation. In its
Reply (paragraph 71) the United Kingdom Government maintained
the submissions contained in paragraph 96 of its hiemorial, including
the claim for a fixed amount of reparation. This claim \vas
expressly repeated in the final United Kingdom submissions. In
paragraph 52 of its Counter-Memorial, the Albanian Governrnent
stated that it had no knowledge of the loss of human life and
damage to ships, but it did not contest the Coart's competence to
decide this question. In the Rejoinder, paragraph 96, that Government declared that, owing to its claim for the dismissal of the case,
it was unnecessary for it to examine the United Kingdom's claim
for reparation. [T~.an.slafio~z".]I t reserves the right if need be,
to discuss this point which should obviously form the subject
of an expert opinion." Having regard to what is said above as
to the previous attitude of that Government, this statement must
be considered as an implied acceptance of the Court's jurisdiction
to decide this question.
It may be asked why the Parties, when drafting the Special
Agreement, did not expressly ask the Court to assess the amount
of the damage, but used the words : "and is there any duty to pay
compensation ?" It seems probable that the explanation is to
be found in the similarity betn-een this clause and the corresponding
clause in the second part of the Special Agreement : "and is there
axiy duty to give satisfaction ?"
The Albanian Government has not disputed the competence of
the Court to decide what kind of sntisfactio~zi s due under this part
of the Agreement. The case \vas argued on behalf of both Parties
on the basis that this question should be decided by the Court.
In the witten plendings, the Xlbanian Government contended
that it \vas entitled to apologies. During the oral proceèdings,
25

[Source edition page 25]

Counsel for Albania discussed the question whethes ê pecuniary
satisfaction \vas due. As no damage was caused, he did not claim
an57 sun~of money. He concluded [t~atzslntion:] " What we desire
is the declaration of the Court from a legal point of view ...."
If, hon-ever, the Court is competent to decide what kind of
satisfaction is due to Albania under the second part of the Speêia!
Agreement, it is difficult to see why it should lack competence to
decide the amount of compensation which is due to the United
Kingdom under the first part. The clauses used in the Special
Agreement are parallel. It cannot be supposed that the Parties,
while drafting these clauses in the same form, intended to give
them opposite meanings-the one as giving the Court jurisdiction,
the other as denying such jurisdiction.
As has been said above, the Security Cmncil, in its Resolution
of April gth, 1947, undoubtedly intended that the whole dispute
should be decided by the Court. If, however, the Court should
limit itself to saying that there is a duty to pay compensation
without deciding what amount of compensation is due, the dispute
would not be finally decided. An important part of it would
remain unsettled. As both Parties have repeatedly declared that
they accept the Resolution of the Security Council, such a result
mould not conform with their declarations. It would not give full
effect to the Resolution, but would leave open the possibility of a
further dispute.
For the foregoing reasons, the Court has arrived at the conclusion
that it has jurisdiction to assess the amount of the compensation.
This cannot, however, be done in the present Judgment. The
Albanian Government has not yet stated which items, if any, of
the various sums claimed it contests, and the United Kingdom
Government has not submitted its evidence with regard to them.
The Court therefore considers that further proceedings on this
subject are necessary ; the order and time-limits of these proceedings will be fixed by the Order of this date.
' In the second part of the Special Agreement, the following
question is submitted to the Court :
"(2) Has the United Kingdom under international law violated
the sovereignty of the Albanian People's Republic by reason of the
acts of the Royal Navy in Albanian waters on the 22nd October
and on the 12th and 13th November 1946 and is there any duty
to give satisfaction ?"
The Court will first consider whether the sovereignty of Albania
was violated by reason of the acts of the British Navy in Albanian
waters on October zznd, 1946.
26

[Source edition page 26]

On May rgth, 1946, the British cruisers Oviolt and Szrpevb,
while passing southward through the North Corfu Channel, were
fired at by an Albanian battery in the vicinity of Saranda. It
appears from the report of the commanding naval officer dated
May zgth, 1946, that the firing started when the ships had already
passed the battery and were mo~ingaw ay from it ; that from 12 to
20 rounds were fired ; that the finng lasted 12 minutes and ceased
only when the ships were out of range ; but that the ships were not
hit although there were a number of "shorts" and of "overs".
An Albanian note of May zrst states that the Coastal Commander
ordered a few shots to be fired in the direction of the ships "in
accordance with a General Order founded on international law".
The United Kingdom Government at once protested to the
Albanian Government, stating that innocent passage through
straits is a right recognized by international law. There ensued
a diplomatic correspondence in which the Albanian Government
asserted that foreign warships and merchant vessels had no right
to pass through Albanian territorial waters without pnor notification to, and the permission of, the Albanian authorities. This
view was put into effect by a communication of the Albanian
Chief of Staff, dated Jlay 17th, 1946, which purported to subject
the passage of foreign warships and merchant vessels in -4lbanian
territorial. waters to previous notification to and authorization by the
Albanian Government. The diplomatic correspondence continued,
and culminated in a United Kingdom note of August znd, 1946,
in which the United Kingdom Government maintained its view
with regard to the right of innocent passage through straits forming
routes for international maritime traffic between two parts of the
high seas. The note ended with the warning that if Albanian
coastal batteries in the future opened fire on any British warship
passing through the Corfu Channel, the fire would be returned.
The contents of this note were, on August ~ s tc,o mmunicated
by the British Admiralty to the Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean, with the instruction that he should refrain from using the
Channel until the note had been presented to the Albanian Government. On Aiigust ~oth,h e received from the Admiralty the
following telegram : "The Albanians have now received the note.
North Corfu Strait may now be used by ships of your fleet, but
only when essential and with armament in fore and aft position.
Jf coastal guns fire at ships passing through the Strait, ships
should fire back." On September zrst, the following telegram

[Source edition page 27]

was sent by the Admiralty to the Commander-in-Chief, hiediterranean : "Establishment of diplomatic relations wvith Albania is
again under consideration by His Riajesty's Government who wish
to know whether the Albanian Government have learnt to behave
themselves. Information is requested whether any ships under
your command have passed through the North Corfu Strait since
August and, if not, whether you intend them to do so shortly."
The Commander-in-Chief answered the next day that his ships
had not done so yet, but that it ww7as his intention that Jfazlritius
and Lennder and twvo destroyers should do so when they departed
from Corfu on October zznd.
It wvas in such circumstances that these two cruisers together
with the destroyers Saz~inareza nd T701age were sent through the
North Corfu Strait on that date.
The Court will now consider the Albanian contention that the
United Kingdom Government violated Albanian sovereignty by
sending the warships through this Strait without the previous
authorization of the Albanian Government.
It is, in the opinion of the Court, generally recognized and in
accordance with international custom that States in time of peace
have a right to send their warships through straits used for international navigation be'nveen two parts of the high seas without the
previous authorization of a co'astal State, provided that the passage
is innocent. Unless othenvise prescribed in an international
convention, there is no right for a coastal State to prohibit such
passage through straits in time of peace.
The Albanian Government does not dispute that the liorth
Corfu Channel is a strait in the geographical sense ; but it denies
that this Channel belongs to the class of international highn-ays
through wvhich a right of passage exists, on the grounds that it is
only of secondas. importance and not el-en a neceçsary route
between twvo parts of the high seas, and that it is used almost
exclusively for local traffic to and from the ports of Corfu and
Saranda.
It may be asked whether the test is to be found in the \lolume of
traffic passing through the Strait or in its greater or lesser importance
for international navigation. But in the opiiiion of the Court the
decisive criterion is rather its geographical situation as connecting
two parts of the high seas and the fact of its being used for international navigation. Sor can it be decisire that this Strait is not
a necessary route bettveen tn-O parts of the high aeas, but only
an alternative passage betwveen the Egean and the Adriatic Seas.
It has nevertheless been a useful route for international maritime
traffic. In this respect, the -\gent of the Vnited Kingdom Government gave the Court tlie foilowing information relating to the
28

[Source edition page 28]

period from April ~st1,9 36, to December 31st, 1937 : "The following is the total number of ships putting in at the Port of Corfu
after passing through or just before passing through the Channel.
During the period of one year nine months, the total number of
ships was 2,884. The flags of the ships are Greek, Italian, Roumanian, Yugoslav, French, Albanian and British. Clearly, very
small vessels are included, as the entries for Albanian vessels are
high, and of course one vesse1 may make several journeys, but
2,884 ships for a period of one year nine months is quite a large
figure. These figures relate to vessels visited by the Customs at
Corfu and so do not include the large number. of vessels which went
through the Strait without calling at Corfu at all." There were
also regular sailings through the Strait by Greek vessels three times
weekly, by a British ship fortnightly, and by two Yugoslav vessels
weekly and by two others fortnightly. The Court is further
informed that the British Navy has regularly used this Channel
for eighty years or more, and that it has also been used by the
navies of other States.
One fact of particular importance is that the North Corfu
Channel constitutes a frontier between Albania and Greece, that
a part of it is wholly within the territorial waters of these States,
and that the Strait is of special importance to Greece by reason of
the traffic to and from the port of Corfu.
Having regard to these various considerations, the Court has
arrived at the conclusion that the North Corfu Channel should
be considered as belonging to the class of international highways
through which passage cannot be prohibited by a coastal State
in time of peace.
On the other hand, it is a fact that the two coastal States did
not maintain normal relations, that Greece had made territorial
claims precisely with regard to a part of Albanian territory bordering on the Channel, that Greece had declared that she considered
herself technically in a state of war with Albania, and that Albania,
invoking the danger of Greek incursions, had considered it necessary to take certain measures of vigilance in this region. The
Court is of opinion that Albania, in view of tliese exceptional
circumstdnces, would have been justified in issuing regulations
in respect of the passage of warships through the Strait, but not
in prohibiting such passage or in subjecting it to the requirement
of special authorization.
For these reasons the Court is unable to accept the Albanian
contention that the Government of the United Kingdom has
violated Albanian sovereignty by sënding the warships through

[Source edition page 29]

the Strait without having obtained the previous authorization of
the Albanian Government.
In these circumstances, it is unnecessary to consider the more
general question, much debated by the Parties, n-hether States
under international law have a right to send warships in time of
peace through territorial waters not included in a strait.
The Albanian Government has further contended that the
sovereignty of Albania was violated because the passage of the
British warships on October zznd, 1946, was not an i?z.izocejzt
passage. The reasons advanced in support of this contention
may be summed up as foilows : The passage was not an ordinary
passage, but a political mission ; the ships were manoeuvring
and sailing in diamond combat formation with soldiers on board ;
the position of the guns was not consistent with innocent passage ;
the vessels passed with crews at action stations ; the number of
the ships and their armament surpassed what \vas necessa- in order
to attain their object and showed an intention to intimidate and
not merely to pass ; the ships had received orders to obsen-e and
report upon the coastal defences and this order was carried out.
It is shown by the Adniiralty telegram of September z~stc,i ted
above, and admitted by the United Kingdom Agent, that the
object of sending the warships through the Strait \vas not only
to cany out a passage for purposes of navigation, but also to
test Albania's attitude. As mentioned above, the Albanian
Government, on May 15th, 1946, tried to impose by means of
gunfire its view with regard to the passage. As the exchange
of dipIomatic notes did not lead to any clarification, the Government of the United Kingdom wanted to ascertain by other ineans
whether the Albanian Govemment would maintain its illegal
attitude and again impose its view by firing at passing ships.
The legality of this measure taken-by the Goveniment of the
United Kingdom cannot be disputed, provided that it \vas carried
out in a manner consistent with the requirements of international
law. The "mission" was designed to affirm a right which had
been unjustly denied. The Government of the United Kingdom
was not bound to abstain from exercising its right of passage,
which the Albanian Government had illegally denied.
It remains, therefore, to consider whether the mnnner in which
the passage was carried out was consistent with the principle of
innocent passage and to examine the various contentions of the
Albanian Government in so far as they appear to be relevant.
When the Albanian coastguards at St. George's Monastery
reported that the British warships were sailing in combat formation and were manoeuvring, they must have been under a misapprehension. it is shown by the evidence that the ships were not
proceeding in combat forrnatior,, but in line, one after the other,

[Source edition page 30]

THE CORFU CHANNEL CASE (MERITS) 3I
and that they were not manoeuvnng until after the first explosion.
Their movements thereafter were due to the explosions and were
made necessary in order to Save human life and the mined ships. It
is showvn by the evidence of wvitnesses that the contention that
soldiers were on board must be due to a misunderstanding probably
ansing from the fact that the two cruisers carried their usual detachment of marines.
It is knowvn from the above-mentioned order issued by the British
-1dmiralty on -4ugust ~oth1,9 46, that ships, when using the North
Corfu Strait, must pass with armament in fore and aft position.
That this order was carried out during the passage on October ~2nd
is stated by the Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean, in a telegram
of October 26th to the Admiralty. The guns were, he reported,
"trained fore and aft, which is their normal position at sea in peae
time, and n-ere not loaded". It is confirmed by the commanders
of Sazinzarez and Volage that the guns were-in this position before
the explosions. The navigating officer on board Jfauritius
explained that al1 guns on that cruiser were in their normal stowage
position. The main guns u-ere in the line of the ship, and the antiaircraft guns were pointing outwards and up into the air, which
is the normal position of these guns on a cruiser both in harbour
and at sea. In the light of this evidence, the Court cannot accept
the Albanian contention that the position of the guns was inconsistent with the rules of innocent passage.
In the above-mentioned teleg~amo f October 26th, the Commander-in-Chief reported that the passage "was made with ships at
action stations in order that they might be able to retaliate quickly
if fired upon again". In view of the firing from the Albanian
battery on May Ij th, this measure of precaution cannot, in itself,
he regarded as unreasonable. But four warships-t~vo cruisers
and t~vod estroyers-passed in this manner, with crews at action
stations, ready to retaliate quickly if fired upon. They passed
one after another through this narrow channel, close to the Albanian
Coast, at a time of political tension in this region. The intention
must have been, not only to test Albania's attitude, but at the same
time to demonstrate such force that she wvould abstain from firing
again on passing ships. Having regard, however, to al1 the circumstances of the case, as described above, the Court is unable to
characterize these measures taken by the United Kingdom authorities as a violation of Albania's sovereignty.
The Admiralty Chart, Annex 21 to the Memorial, shows that
coastal defences in the Saranda region had been observed and
reported. In a report of the commander of Volage, dated Octo-

[Source edition page 31]

ber z3rd, 1~46-a report relating to the passage on the zznd-it
is stated : "The most was made of the opportunities to study
Albanian defences at close range. These included, with reference
to XCU ...."- and he then gives a description of some coastal
defences.
In accordance with Article 49 of the Statute of the Court and
Article 54 of its Rules, the Court requested the United Kingdom
Agent to produce the documents referred to as XCU for the use
of the Court. Those documents were not produced, the Agent
pleading naval secrecy ; and the United Kingdom witnesses declined
to answer questions relating to them. It is not the~eforep ossible
to know the real content of these naval orders. The Court cannot,
however, draw from this refusa1 to prodaice the orders any conclusions differing from those to which the actual events gave rise.
The United Kingdom Agent stated that the instructions in these
orders related solely to the contingency of shots being fired from
the coast-which did not happen. . If it is tme, as iAe commander
of Volage said in evidence, that the orders contained information
concerning certain positions from which the British warships might
have been fired at, it cannot be deduced therefrom that the vessels
had received orders io reconnoitre Albanian coastal defences.
Lastly, as the Court has to judge of the innocent nature of the
passage, it cannot remain indifferent to the fact that, though two
warships struck mines, there was no reaction, either on their
part or on that of the cruisers that accompanied them.
With regard to the observations of coastal defences made after
the explosions, these were justified by the fact that two ships had
just been blown up and that, in this critical situation, their commander~m ight fear that they would be fired on from the coast, as
on May 15th.
Having thus examined the various contentions of the Albanian
Govemment in so far as they appear to be relevant, the Court has
arrived at the conclusion that the United Kingdom did not violate
the sovereignty of Albania by reason of the acts of the British Navy
in Albanian waters on October zznd, 1946.
In addition to the passage of the United Kingdom warships on
October zznd, 1946, the second question in the Çpecial Agreement
relates to the acts of the Royal Navy in Albanian waters on
November 12th and qth, 1946. This is the minesweeping operation called "Operation Retail" by the Parties during the proceedings. This name will be used in the present Judgment.

[Source edition page 32]

After the explosions of October zznd, the United Kingdom
Govemment sent a note to the Albanian Government, in which
it announced its intention to sweep the Corfu Channel shortly.
The Albanian reply, which was received in London on October pst,
stated that the Albanian Govemment would not give its consent
to this unless the operation in question took place outside Albanian
tem'torial waters. Meanwhile, at the United Kingdom Government's request, the International Central Mine Clearance Board
decided, in a resolution of November ~st1,9 46, that there should
be a further sweep of the Channel, subject to Albania's consent.
The United Kingdom Govemment having infonned the Albanian
Government, in a communication of November ~oth,t hat the
proposed sweep would take place on November ~ztht,h e Albanian
Government replied the nth, protesting against this "unilateral
0x1
decision of His Majesty's Government". It said it did not consider it inconvenient that the British fleet should undertake the
sweeping of the channel of navigation, but added that, before
sweeping was camed out, it considered it indispensable to decide
what area of the sea should be deemed to constitute this channel,
and proposed the establishment of a Mixed Commission for the
purpose. It ended by saying that any sweeping undertaken
without the consent of the Albanian Government outside the channe1 thus constituted, i.e., inside Albanian temtorial waters where
foreign warships have no reason to sail, could only be considered
as a deliberate violation of Albanian territory and sovereignty.
After this exchange of notes, "Oyeration Retail" took place
on November 12th and 13th. Commander Mestre, of the French
Navy, was asked to attend as observer, and was present at the
sweep on November 13th. The operation was camed out under
the protection of an important covering force composed of an
aircraft carrier, cruisers and other war vessels. This covering
force remained throughout the operation at a certain distance
to the west of the Channel, except for the frigate St. Bride's Bay,
which was stationed in the Channel south-east of Cape Kiephali.
The sweep began in the morning of November 13th, at about
g o'clock, and ended in the afternoon near nightfall. The area
swept was in Albanian territorial waters, and within the limits
of the channel previously swept.
The United Kingdom Govemment does not dispute that "Operation Retail" was carried out against the clearly expressed wish of
the Albanian Govemment. It recognizes that the operation had not
the consent of the international mine clearance organizations, that
it could not be justifie& as the exercise of a right of innocent
passage, and lastIy that, in principle, international law does not
allow a State to assemble a large number of warships in the

[Source edition page 33]

territorial waters of another State and to carry out minesweeping
in those waters. The United Kingdom Government states that
the operation was one of extreme urgency, and that it considered
itself entitled to carry it out without anybody's consent.
The United Kingdom Government put forward two reasons
in justification. First, the Agreement of November zznd, 1945,
signed by the Govemments of the United Kingdom, France,
the Soviet Union and the United States of America, authorizing
regional mine clearance organizations, such as the Mediterranean
Zone Board, to divide the sectors in their respective zones amongst
the States concerned for siveeping. Relying on the circumstance
that the Corfu Channel was in the sector allotted to Greece by
the Mediterranean Zone Board on November 5th, i.e., before
the signing of the above-mentioned Agreement, .the United
Kingdom Government put forward a permission given by the
Hellenic Govemment to resweep the navigable channel.
The Court does not consider this argument convincing.
It must be noted that, as the United Kingdom Govemment
admits, the need for resweeping the Channel was not under
consideration in November 1945 ; for previous sweeps in 1944
and 1945 were considered as having effected complete safety.
As a consequence, the allocation of the sector in question to
Greece, and, therefore, the permission of the Hellenic Govemment
which is relied on, were both of them merely nominal. It is
also to be remarked that Albania was not consulted regarding
the allocation to Greece of the sector in question, despite the
fact that the Channel passed through Albanian territorial waters.
But, in fact, the explosions of October 22nd, 1946,i n a channel
declared safe for navigation, and one which the United Kingdom
Government, more than any other govemment, had reason to
consider safe, raised quite a different problem from that of a routine
sweep carried out under the orders of the mineclearance organizations. These explosions were suspicious ; they raised a question
of responsibility.
Accordingly, this was the ground on which the United Kingdom
Govemment chose to establish its main line of defence. According
to that Government, the corpora delicti must be secured as quickly
as possible, for fear they should be taken away, without leaving
traces, by the authors of the minelaying or by the Albanian
authorities. This justification took two distinct forms in the
United Kingdom Government's arguments. It was presented
first as a new and special application of the theory of intervention,
by means of which the State intervening would secure possession
of evidence in the territory of another State, in order to submit
it to an international tribunal and thus facilitate its task.

[Source edition page 34]

The Court cannot accept such a line of defence. The Court
can only regard the alleged right of intervention as the manifestation of a policy of force, such .as has, in the past, given rise
to most serious abuses and such as cannot, whatever be the
present defects in international organization, find a place in
international law. Intervention is perhaps still less admissible
in the particular form it would take here ; for, from the nature
of things, it would be reserved for the most powerful States,
and might easily lead to perverting the administration of international justice itself.
The United Kingdom Agent, in his speech in reply, has further
classified "Operation Retail" among methods of self-protection or
self-help. The Court cannot accept this defence either. Between
independent States, respect for territorial sovereignty is an essential
foundation of intemational relations. The Court recognizes that
the Albanian Govemment's complete failure to cany out its duties
after the explosions, and the dilatory nature of its diplornatic notes,
are extenuating circumstances for the action of the United
Kingdom Government. But to ensure respect for international
law, of which it is the organ, the Court must declare that the
action of the British Navy CO stituted a violation of Albanian
.
sovereignty
This declaration is in accordance with the request made by
Albania through her Counsel, and is in itself appropriate satisfaction.
The method of carnina out "O~erationR etail" has also been
"
criticized by the Alban4 ian Govemment, the main ground of complaint being that the United Kingdom, on that occasion, made use
of an unnecessarily large display of force, out of proportion to the
requirements of the sweep. The Court thinks that this criticism
is not justified. It does not consider that the action of the British
Navy was a de~nonstrationo f force for the purpose of exercising
political pressure on Albania. The responsible naval commander,
who kept his ships at a distance from the coast, cannot be reproached
for having employed an important covering force in a region where
twice within a few months his ships had been the object of serious
outrages.

[Source edition page 35]

on the first question put by the Special Agreement of
March zjth, 1948,
by eleveil votes to five,
Gives judgment that the People's Republic of Albania is responsible under international law for the explosions which occurred on
October zznd, 1946, in Albanian waters, and for the damage and
loss of human life that resulted therefrom ; and
by ten votes to six,
Reserves for further consideration the assessment of the amount
of compensation and regulates the procedure on this subject by
an Order dated this day ;
on the second question put by the Special Agreement of
Jiarch zjth, 1948,
by fourteen votes to two,
Gives judgment that the United Kingdom did not violate the
sovereignty of the People's Republic of Albania by reason of the
acts of the British Navy in Albanian waters on October zznd,
1946 ; and
unanimously,
Gives judgment that by reason of the acts of the British Navy in
=Ilbanian waters in the course of the Operation of November 12th
and 13th, 1946, the United Kingdom violated the sovereignty of
the People's Republic of Albania, and that this declaration by
the Court constitutes in itself appropriate satisfaction.

[Source edition page 36]

Done in French and English, the French text being authoritative, at the Peace Palace, The Hague, this ninth day of April,
one thousand nine hundred and forty-nine, in three copies, one
of which will be placed in the archives of the Court and the others
transrnitted to the Government of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and of the People's Republic of
Albania respectively.
(Signed) J. G. GUERRERO,
Acting. President.
(Signed) E. HAXIBRO,
Registrar.
Judge BASDEVANTP,r esident of the Court, whilst accepting
the whole of the operative part of the Judgment, feels bound
to state that he cannot accept the reasons given by the Court
in support of its jurisdiction to assess the amount of compensation,
other. reasons being in his opinion more decisive.
Judge ZORIEId~e clares that he is unable to agree either with the
operative clause or with the reasons for the Judgment in the part
relating to Albania's responsibility ; the arguments submitted, and
the facts established are not such as to convince him that the
Albanian Govemment was, or ought to have been, aware, before
Noveinber 13th, 1946, of the existence of the minefield discovered
on that date. On the one hand, the attitude adopted by a government when confronted by certain facts varies according to the
circumstances, to its mentality, to the means at its disposal and to
its experience in the conduct of public affairs. But it has not been
contested that, in 1946, Albania had a new Government possessing
no experience in international practice. It is therefore difficult
to draw any inferences whatever from its attitude. Again, the
conclusion of tlie Experts that the operation of laying the mines
must have been seen is subject to an express reservation : it would
be necessary to assume the realization of several conditions, in
particular the maintenance of normal look-out posts at Cape

[Source edition page 37]

Kiephali, Denta Point and San Giorgio Monastery, and the existence
of normal weather conditions at the date. But the Court knows
neither the date on which the mines were laid nor the weather
conditions prevailing on that date. Furthermore, no proof has
been fumished of the presence of a look-out post on Denta Point,
though that, according to the Experts, would have been the only
post which would necessarily have observed the minelaying. On
the other hand, the remaining posts would merely have been able
to obsen~eth e passage of the ships, and there is no evidence to show
that they ought to have concluded that the ships were going to
lay mines. According to the Experts, these posts could neither
have seen nor heard the minelaying, because the San Giorgio
Monastery was 2,000 m. from the nearest mine and Cape Kiephali
was several kilometres away from it. As a result, the Court is
confronted with suspicions, conjectures and presilmptions, the
foundations for which, in Judge Zori-iCiC's view, are too uncertain
to justify him in imputing to a State the responsibility for a grave
delinquency in international law.
Judge ALVAREZw, hilst concurring in the Judgment of the
Court, has availed himself of the right conferred on him by
Article 57 of the Statute and appended to the Judgrnent a
statement of his individual opinion.
Judges \~'INIARÇIBIIA, DAWPIA SHAK, RYLOVan d ~EVEDOan,d
Judge ad hoc EGER, declaring that they are unable to concur
in the Judgment of the Court, have availed themselves of the
right conferred on them by Article 57 of the Statute and appended
to the Judgment statements of their dissenting opinions.

[Source edition page 38]

LIST OF DOCUMENTS SUBhlITTED TO THE COURT.
A.-During the written proceedzngs .
Admiralty Chart No. 206 showing the Corfu Strait.
Section of German Mine Information Chart.
(This is a chart which was captured by the Allies, showing tlie
North Corfu Channel and the position of mines laid by the Axis
there ; the original chart has been filed with the Registry.)
International Agreement between the Govemments of the United
Kingdom, France, .U.S.S.R. and the United States, setting up
the Mine Clearance Boards and dated November 22nd, 1945.
Affidavit by despatch clerk at the Admiralty proving despatch
of Medri Charts to Albania (August zoth, 1947).
Section of Medri Index Chart showing North Corfu swept channel
and the international highway established therein together with
Medri pamphlets for use with the Index Chart.
(Single copy of the entire Chart and of the complete pamphlets
numbered 5, 9 and 12 have been filed with Registry.)
Diplomatic correspondence between the Government of the
United Kingdom and Albania regarding the nght of navigation
in the Strait of Corfu.
Admiralty tracings showing the North Corfu swept channel and
the position and tracks of H.M.S. Orion, Superb, Leander,
Sarcmavez and Mauritizbs, passing through the North Corfu
Channel on May 15th, 1946, and on October aznd, 1946.
Photographs of H.M.S. Saumarez (below water line) and Volage
(bows blown off) taken shortly after the explosion on October 22nd,
1946.
Admiralty tracing showing position of H.M. ships at the time
of the explosion.
IO. Report on damage to H.M.S. Saumarez (December 8th, 1946).
II. Report on damage to H.M.S. Volage (November 3oth, 1946).
12. List. of sailors killed, with statement of pensions, etc., payable
to dependants.
List of sailors injured, with statement of expenses, pensions, etc.
Statement of cost of repairs to the Volage and cost of replacement
of the Saumare:.
Ij. Minutes of Mine Clearance Boards.
16. Reports of Capitaine Mestre (November 16th and 23rd, 1946).
(There were two reports, both in French. The reason why
there were two reports was that Capitaine Mestre wished to
make certain corrections in his second report of certain statements
which he had made in his first report.)
Reports on Operation Retail by Rear-Admira1 Kinahan and
Commander Whitford. (The minesweeping operation of November ~jth,1 946.)
132

[Source edition page 39]

Chart showing position in which mines were found on
November 13th, 1946.
Photographs of the mines.
Report on mines examined at Admiralty Mining Establishment,
Leigh Park House, Hants.
Chart showing the defences of Saranda.
Affidavit of Skipper Bargellini regarding the incident of
U.N.R.R.A. barges on October qth, 1946 (December 31st, 1946).
Documents and records of the Security Council, etc., relative to
the dispute.
Third Interim Report of the Central Mine Clearance Board in
European Waters after the war (October ~st1,9 46-June 3oth,
1947).
Mine Information Chart No. 2711.
Two signals relating to the sweeping in October .1g44 of the
Corfu Channel.
Extracts from Hansard (Parliamentary Debates), containing
Statements by the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs regarding
Albania.
Telegram from Flag Officer Commanding 15th Cruiser Squadron,
describing the incident of May ~jth,1 946.
Photostat copies of extracts from Political Report of July zgth,
1945, portions of which appear in Annex II of the Albanian
Counter-Memorial.
Text of Admira1 Willis's statement of October 26th, 1946.
Photograph of Saumarez omitted from Annex 8 of United Kingdom
Memorial.
Extract from Third Interim Report of Central Mine Clearance
Board in European waters after the war.
Affidavit by Commanding Officer of Skipjack identifying mines
brought to Malta with those found at Corfu (September 5th, 1947).
Chartlet showing areas swept on November ~zth1,9 46.
Minutes of the Central Mine Clearance Board in European waters
after the war (May 25th, 1945-May 19th, 1948).
Minutes of the Mediterranean Zone Mine Clearance Board (November jth, 1945-May th, 1948).
Extracts from the Minutes of the First Meeting of the Mediterranean Zone Mine Clearance Board (November 5th, 1945). and of
the Fourth Meeting (Second Sitting-February 27th, 1946).
B.- A!ter the clostcre of the written proceedings.
(a) Before the Itearing :
Affidavit sworn in London on October 4th, 1948, by Karel Kovacic,
former Lieutenant-Commander in the Yugoslav Navy.
Chart annexed to above affidavit, showing the route probably
followed by the vessels in going from Sibenik to Boka Kotorska
and to Corfu Channel.
133

[Source edition page 40]

bis. Tracing made from sketch of Panikovac from the Yugoslav
'
Hydrographie Institute, November zoth, 1948 (filed by Albanian
Government's Agent), showing the position of M-minesweepers in
Panikovac Cove.
Copy of a note from the Ministry for Foreign Affairs to the British
Embassy, Athens, August 13th, 1948.
Affidavit by Commander Sworder (October zznd, 1948) regarding
minesweeping in the Corfu Channel in October 194.4, January and
February, 1945.
Estract from Admiralty Instructions on minesweeping in war time.
Chart showing sectors swept in October 1944.
Affidavit by D. G. Jacobs, First Lieutenant of BTMS zoo9 of
the 153rd Minesweeping Flotilla, in October 1944 (October zznd,
1948).
Affidavit by Commander Sworder showing the manner in which
Medri Charts were drawn up (October zznd, 1948).
Log-books of the Volage, Mauritius and Leander.
Affidavit by Lieutenant Godsall, Officer of the Watch on board
the Saumarez on October z~nd1,9 46, from 14.00 hours to 14.53
hours (October 22nd, 1948).
Report of a Board of Enquiry set up on the arriva1 of the Saumare=
at Corfu (October qth, 1946).
Chart prepared bu the Members of the above-mentioned Board
of Enquiry, showing the route followed by the Saumarez.
Affidavit by Commander Paul, in command of the Volage on
October zznd, 1946 (October 22nd, 1948).
Track-chart of the Volage prepared by Commander Paul.
Certified true copy of the letter of the Commander-in-Chief,
Mediterranean, to the Admiralty of August 15th, 1946, transmitting the programme for the autumn criiise of his Fleet.
Photostat copy of Report of Proceedings of Volage, by Commander Paul (October 23rd, 1946).
Photostat copy of Report of Proceedings of Saumarez, by Captain Selby (October 23rd, 1946).
Photostat copy of Report of Proceedings of Leander, b57 Captain Otway Ruthven (October 23rd, 1946).
Photostat copy of Report of Proceedings of Ocean, by Captain John
(October 24th, 1946).
Certified true copy of Report of Rear-Admiral Kinahan, Commanding First Cruiser Squadron in H.M.S. Mnlcritizts, on the
explosions caused on board the Saumarez and Volage by mines
(October qrd, 1946).
Original copy of a German chart captured by the Allies at the
German Admiralty, Berlin (Ionian Sea and Gulf of Taranto,
south-western Coast of Greece).
Affidavit by Commander Whitford, Senior Officer of the 5th
Minesweeping Flotilla from March to December, 1946, explainine
the difference between mines recently laid and those that have
been long in the water (October zznd, 1948).

[Source edition page 41]

CORFU CHANNEL CASE (MERITS) (ANNEX 1) 135
Photographs M 1, 2 and 3 of a German mine that had been
two years in the water, with a cerîificate by Colonel Golemis.
Photographs M 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of a German mine that had
been five years in the water, with a certificate by Commander
Littleboy.
Telegrams passing between the Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean, and the Admiralty, prior to the incident of October aznd,
1946, embodying the instructions of the Admiralty regarding
the passage of H.M. ships through the Corfu Chamel.
Telegrams passing between the Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean, and the Admiralty, embodying the instructions of the
Admiralty regarding Operation Retail.
Affidavit by Professor J. E. Hams, Professor of Zoology in
the University of Bristol, conceming the state of the mines
swept in the Corfu Channel on November 13th, 1946 (October 27th,
1948).
Affidavit by Mr. N. 1. Hendey, of the Admiralty Central
Metallurgical Laboratory, Emsworth, giving the reasons for the
absence of fouling on mines in the Black Sea (October 25th,
1948)-
Affidavit by Commander Moloney, certifying that no dumps of
German mines had been left in Greece (October zgth, 1948).
(b) At the hearing :
Photograph of Panikovac Cove.
Copies of two telegrams from the British Admiralty dated
November gth, 1948, relating to the Mljet and Meljine.
Copy of two telegrams from the Air Ministry, United Kingdom,
dated November 8th, 1948, and concerning weather conditions
and the angle of the Sun at Sibenik on October 16th, 17th
and 18th, 1946.
Jane's Fightifig Ships 1946-1947.
Photographs of mines found during the sweep on November 13th.
1946. (These photographs had ben submitted to the Security
Council in 1947 and were marked VI (b) and VI (c).)
Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Assistance between Yugoslavia
and Albania (July gth, 1946.-The date did not appear on the
copy filed).
Economic Agreement between Yugoslavia and Albania (November 27th, 1946.-The date did not appear on the copy filed).
Marinkalender I 947.
School and College Atlas (Londcn : G. W. Bacon & Co.).
: H. P. Leopold).
& London, IN).
Rough copy of log of the Mauritiws.
Document showing the differences between the entries in the
log-book (fair copy) and the rough log of the Mauritius.
Three fragments of the mine which struck Volage.
Extract from Report dated May zgth, 1946, from Rear-Admiral
Kinahan, addressed to the Commander-in-Chief of the Mediter-
135

[Source edition page 42]

CORFU CHANNEL CASE (MERITS) (ANNEX 1) 136
ranean, reporting the proceedings of the squadron under his
command for the period April 29th to May 25th, 1946 (paragraph
23, relating to the passage of the squadron through the Corfii
Channel on May 15th, 1946).
Warships of the World, Victory Edition, U.S.A.
Two sketches made by Commander Kovacic at the hearing on
November qth, 1948, morning, showing one of the Yugoslav
ships with the rails and mifielaying mechanism.
Xj. Photograph of Panikoc-ac Cove on which Commander Koc-acic
drew an arrow showing the entrance to the tunnel used as a mine
store (hearing on iu'ovember qth, 1948, morning).
Sh. Two plans of the region of Sibenik on which Commander Kovacic
had marked : (a) the course foliowed ip the launch and the place
from which he could recognize the mines ; (b)t he jetty from which
the photograph of Panikovac Cove was probably taken (hearing
on November 24th, 1948, morning).
Report of the 153rd Minesweeping Flotilla (October 8th, 1944)
on the sweeping of the Korcula and Scedro Channels, with a
tracing showing the minesweeping operations.
File relating to mines laid by the Germans (German documents).
German files relating to mine stocks.
Original of the Report of Proceedings of the Leander, made by
Captain Otway Ruthven (October 23rd, 1946) (a photocopy had
already been filed), with signature certified by Captain Selby.
Tracing showing course followed by the Leander on October 22nd,
1946, dated October qrd, 1946, and attached to the Report
of Captain Otway Ruthven (this tracing replaces the trackchart made on December 26th, 1946, and filed as Annex 7 to
the United Kingdom Memorial).
gr. Typeu~ittenc opy of the Report of the Volage made on October 23rd, 1946, by Commander Paul (a photocopy had already
been filed), with certificate by Commander Paul.
Original of Report sent by Rear-Admira1 Kinahan on May zgth,
1946, to Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean, on proceedings of
his Squadron from April 29th to May 25th, 1946, with signature
certified by Commander Whitford.
Sketch made by Lieutenant-Commander Kovacic at the hearing
on the morning of November 26th, 1948, showing the position
of Mljet and Meljine as he saw them on the evening of
October 17th or 18th, 1946, about 18.30 hours.
Plan of environs of Sibenik, on which Commander Kovacic
marked the site of the house from which he saw the Mljet and
the Meljine on October 17th or 18th, 1946, about 18.30 hours
(hearing on morning of November 26th, 1948).
Sketch made by Lieutenant-Commander Kovacic at the hearing
in the afternoon of November 25th, 1948, showing the position
of Mljct and Meljine in relation to the mouth of the tunnel
at Panikovac Cove, on October 17th or 18th, about 16.30 hours.
136

[Source edition page 43]

97. Two sketches made by Lieutenant-Commander Kovacic at the
heanng in the aftemoon of November 26th, 1948, showing the
manoeuvre made by the MZjet and Meljine to facilitate the
loading of the mines, and the position of the two vessels during
the loadirig.
98. Sketch showing a minesweeper with its cable cutting the moonng
of a mine, and a mine already swept (sketch made by Commander Sworder and shown to the Court at the hearing in the
morning of November ~2nd.1 948).
99. Diagram showing sweeps of moored mines, 100% safe (made by
Commander Sworder and shown to the Court at the hearing on
the morning of Not-ember aznd, 198).
IOO. Photograph showing Mazrritius and Saumarez after the esplosion
(this photograph was -spbmitted to the Security Council in
1947, and was number. II (a), A. 4).
101. Two extracts from Yugoslav illustrated papers, showing two
photographs of a minelayer with its demck.
102. Map of Sibenik, from U.S. Army (scale 1/5o,ooo).
103. Admiralty Chart No. 1581 : Approach to Sibenik harbour.
Air photograph (No. 4025) of Sibenik and Panikovac Cove.
Page of an illustrated paper, showing the view over the sea from
a house situated near Keric's house.
Tracing of Panikovac Cove, made bp Yugoslav Hydrographic
Institute, November aoth, 1940 (original fded by Albania).
Telegram received from Rome by United Kingdom Delegation,
conceming weather reports published at Sibenik on October 17th
and 18th, 1946 (November 24th, 1948).
Reply by the United Kingdom experts to questions put 0€ the
Mixed Committee of Experts by Judge EEer on November 3oth,
1948 : (1) Was the light sufficient at 17.35 hours to enable
Lieutenant-Commander Kovacic to see the vessels moored in
Panikovac Cove ? (2) If the light was sufficient, would the view
have been interrupted by the lie of the land ?
Letter from Commander Sworder to Rear-Admiral Moullec, dated
December 8th, 1948, forwarding a revision of the common reply
to question 5 of the Questionnaire by the agents submitted on
November 26th, 1948, to the experts of the two Parties.
Affidavit by hl. Zivan Pavlov (December roth, 1948), certifying
that between October ~3rda.n d 26th, 1946, in the Gulf of Kotor,
he saw a Yugoslav minelayer of the Meljilte class, mo\.ing towards
the fuel refdling points at Boka Kotorska (original in Serb-Croat,
with English translation).
III. Mernbership card of the Yugoslav Seamen's and Port-workers'
Union, bearing name of Zivan Pavlov (in Serbo-Croat language,
with English translation of pertinent passages).
112. Instructions for rendering Safe Underwater II'eapons-German
Buoyant Mines-1943.
137

[Source edition page 44]

Air photograph of the environs of Saranda, showing certain
paths and roads (1943).
Map of Saranda District (I/~O,OOAOlb ania sheet 26-IV Saranda).
Amendments submitted by the United Kingdom naval experts
to the replies they had given to questions by Judge EZer.
Six copies of photographs of H.M.S. Mauritius (photographs
Nos. A 1, A 2, A 3 and A 4 are additional copies of photographs
appearing in Supplement 6 to Minutes of the Security Council,
and are bad reproductions).
A.-During the written proceedings :
Letter from the Greek Representatiw to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations (March ~oth,1 947).
Declaration by Captain Avdi Mati (October 4th, 1947).
Letter from the Head of the United Kingdom Military Mission
in Albania to the Albanian Amy General Staff (January 25th,
1946).
Minutes of the Meeting of the Mediterranean Zone Mine
Clearance Board, held on July znd, 1946.
Report on the incident of May 15th, 1946.
Letter from the Albanian Representative to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, April ~zth,1 947.
Report on the incident of October zznd, 1946.
Reuter's communiqué of October 26th, 1946.
Article 3 of the Albanian-Yugoslav Maritime Arrangement of
September ~oth1,9 46.
IO. Report on the occurrences on November 12th and 13th, 1946.
II. Report by General Hodgson (July zgth, 1945) on Greek provocation.
Chart showing passage of British war squadron on October zznd,
1946.
Map of Albanian coast ; Saranda and environs.
Report of the Commander of the Yugoslav Navy on German
minefields.
List of cases of vessels that have struck mines, published by
Lloyds.
"Aggressive acts of the G~eekm onarcho-fascist Government
against Albania."
"War provocation by the Greek monarcho-fascist Government
against Albania."
Full text of the Albanian-Yugoslav Maritime Arrangement of
September ~oth1,9 46.
Message from General Maitlahd Wilson, Allied Commander-in-
Chief, Mediterranean, to Colonel-General Enver Hoxha (November ~zth1,9 44).
Message from Mr. Corde11 Hull (November zSth, 1943).
Message from Mr. Edward Stettinius (May zznd, 1945).

[Source edition page 45]

Declaration by MI'. Winston Churchill (November 4th, 1943).
Declaration by Mr. Cordell Hull (undated).
Letter from General Hodgson congratulating General Enver
Hoxha on the general elections (December 4th, 1945).
Photocopies of parts of Medri Charts, M.6502 : NO. 3, December 17th, 1945 ; No. 8, May 6th, 1946 ; No. 12, August 26th, 1946,
showing the route through the North Corfu Channel on those
dates. The map of December 17th, 1945, gives to the route the
number 18/54.
Telegram from harbour-master of Saranda, October zznd, 1946.
Letter from the Albanian Amy General Staff to the Foreign
Ministry, Tirana, August 3oth, 1948.
Summary of an article in the "Red Star", appearing in the
Bashkimi newspaper, May 18th, 1947.
Letters from two Greek sailors to the United Nations Commission
of Enquiry in Greece (February 15th, 1947).
Report on the possibility of secret minelaying.
Tracing of track-chart of Mauritius, taken from British Chart
Annex 7, and position of mines according to British Chart, Annes 9.
B.- Afte~th e closure of the written proceedings :
(a) Before the hearing :
Note from the Yugoslav Legation at The Hague to the Agent
for the Albanian Govemment, dated November 8th, 1948, and
fonvarding a communiqué of the Yugoslav Govemrnent concerning Lieutenant-Commander Kovacic's evidence.
Tracing of swept channel and normal route for shipping through
the middle of the North Corfu Channel.
Tracing of swept channel and of the North Corfu Channel Zone
not deeper than 25 fathoms.
Tracing of respective positions of German channel and swept
channel.
Tracing of position of the minefield and track of Mauritius,
Leander, Superb and Orion.
Minutes of the Secunty Council, First Year, Second Series,
Supplement No. 4.
(b) At the heczring :
Report by M. Jacques Chapelon, Professor of Analysis at the
École polytechnique, Paris, concerning the passage of Mauritius
through a minefield.
Extract from Order No. 892 of the Yugoslav Ministry of National
Defence, dated November 17th, 1945, concerning minesweepers
M I, M 2 and M 3 (in Serbo-Croat, with French translation
certified correct by Yugoslav Legation at The Hague).
Sworn statement, dated November 17th, 1948, relating to repair
of ships of the M class and type in Sibenik dockyard, between
September 27th and November gth, 1946 (in Serbo-Croat, with
139

[Source edition page 46]

French translation certified correct by Yugoslav Legation at
The Hague).
Photocopy of a page of the Repairs Register of Sibenik dockyard (copy, with French translation of the entries conceming
the M 1, M 2 and M 3 vessels, certified correct by Yugoslav
Legation at The Hague).
Calculation made by Captain Ormanov of height of sun at
Sibenik on October ~Sth,1 946, at 15.15 hours.
Sworn statement concerning the officer Drago Blazevic, dated
November 17th, 1948 (in Serbo-Croat, with French translation
certified correct by Yugoslav Legation at The Hague).
Certificate concerning movements of ships of the ill.class and
type in October 1946, dated No\-ember 17th, 1948 (in Serbo-Croat,
with French translation certified correct by Yugoslav Legation
at The Hague).
British Admiralty Chart No. 1581 : Approach to Sibenik harbour.
Sketch of Panikovac by Yugoslav Hydrographid Institute, dated
November zoth, 1948.
Cadastral plan of town of Sibenik.
Photographs Nos. 1, II and III of Panikovac, taken from Cipad
quay, or near hi.
Photographs Nos. IV and V, looking towards Panikovac from
the terrace on which Lieutenant-Commander Kovacic was.
Italian map of Sibenik (No. 558).
Report of the 1-ugoslav "Commission" concerning the nonarailability of the M 1, M 2 and BI 3 (three original documents
dated Kovember th, 1946, with French translations certified
correct by Yugoslav Legation at The Hague).
Work dockets of Sibenik dockyard for Orders Nos. 920, 921
and 922, relating to ships M 1, M 2 and M 3 (original documents
in Serbo-Croat, with French translations certified correct by
Yugoslav Legation at The Hague).
1Vork docket concerning ship M 1, signed by Lieutenant-Cornmander Kovacic (original in Serbo-Croat, with French translation
certified correct by the Yugoslav Legation at The Hague).
''\York Orders" Nos. 923, 921 and 922, addressed to the Directorate of Sibenik Dockyard, dated September 26th, 19.46, and
concerning repairs to be done to the boilers of the ships Ii.I r, AI 3
and JI 3 (three original documents in Serbo-Croat, with French
translations certified correct by Yugoslav Legation at The Hague).
Affidavit by the Presidency of the Government of the People's
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, on the subject of legal time in
Yugoslavia (in Serbo-Croat, dated November 27th, 1948, with
French translation certified correct by Yugoslav Legation at
The Hague).
Reply by the experts of the Albanian Delegation (December 4th
1948) to questions piit by Judge ECer to the Mixed Committee of
Experts on November 3oth, 1948 : (1) 15:as there sufficient light
140

[Source edition page 47]

at 17.35 hours to enable Lieutenant-Cornmander Kovacic to see
the vessels moored in Panikovac.Co1-e ? (2) If the light was
sufficiené, would the lie of the land have obstructed the \?ew ?
57. Nautical instructions for the East Mediterranean (Imprimerie
nationale, 194 5).
5s. Sketch showing part of a vessel of the hl-class that might have
been seen from the coast at night from an altitude of 15 feet,
the vessel being : (1) 550 metres from the shore ; (2) I$ miles
from the shore (sketch made by Captaiii Ormanov and shown
to the Court at the hearing on the afternoon of December 8th, 1948).
59. Register of the naval dockyard at Sibenik.
60. Map of "Europe and North Africa", sheet 4, published by the
French National Geographical Institute in 1941-showing
shipping routes.
61. Four photographs of the coast near Saranda.
62. Sketch showing roughly the hills around Panikovac Cove towards
Sibenik (sketch made by Rear-Admira1 Moullec).
63. Observations by Rear-Admira1 Moullec on the Reports of Commander Sworder as to the position of the ships in Panikovac Bay.
64. Original of Report of Commander of First lnfantry Regiment,
dated May ~jth,1 946.
65. Original of letter of May 16th, 1946, addressed to Tirana.
66. Original of Captain Ali Shtino's Report, dated October 23rd,
1946 (concerning events on October zznd, 1946).
,4.-During the written proceedings :
I. Special Agreement between Albania and the United Kingdom,
dated llarch 25th 1948.
B.-During the hearing :
2. Questionnaire prepared bÿ M. Pierre Cot and Sir Eric Beckett,
and submitted to the experts of the two Parties on November 26th,
1948 : height of the sun at Sibenik on October 17th and 18th, 1946.
3. Replies established jointly by the Parties to above Questionnaire
(?\To\.ember 27th, 1948).
4. Two diagrams showing the mornent when a shadow would have
faIlen on the jetty where the mines were being loaded.
5. Sketch of the environs of Sibenik showing nearest points from
which the jetty would have been visible during the journey of
the motor-boat that Lieutenant-Commander Kovacic was in.
(Three possible routes are gi\-en in the Questionnaire.)
6. Joint Sote of Cnited Kingdom and Albanian experts on the
qiiestions put by Judge ECer to the Mixed Committee of Experts
on Yo\wnber 3oth, 1948 : (1) \Vas there sufficient light at 17.35
hours to enable Lieutenant-Commander Kovacic to see the vessels
inoored in Paniko\-ac Co\-e ? (2) If the light was sufficient, wouid
the lie of the land have obstructed the view ?

[Source edition page 48]

EXPERTS' REPORT OF JANUARY 8th, 1949.
The Committee of Naval Experts appointed by the International
Court' of Justice on December 17th, 1948, have the honour to submit
,to the Court the following unanimous answers to the questions put
to them :
Question (1). You are requested to examine the situation in tlze North
Corfu Strait immediately before October eond, 1946,
' from the point of view of
(a) the position of the swept channel.
(1) (a) ANSWER:
The German track shown in Annex 2 to the United Kingdom
Memorial could not be the centre line of a one-mile swept channel
because the western boundary would in this case intersect Minefield G 146 c.
When the Royal Navy planned to sweep a channel through the
North Corfu Strait in 1944, route 18/32 and 18/34 was established,
which was, according to us, the only feasible way to make a passage
through Corfu Channel without doing unnecessary sweeping of Minefield QBY 539. We consider therefore route 18/32 and 18/34 the quickest
and safest way to open up a route through the North Corfu Channel.
(b) the efjectiveness of the mineclearance prer~iolrsly
carried out.
(1) (6) ANSWER:
In order to decide whether the sweeping operations which were
carried out in October 1944 and January 1945 were effective, it is
necessary to 'study the minesweeping reports. The latter, however,
could not be produced. But bearing in mind :
1st. That the Royal Navy had a great esperience in mineclearing ;
2nd. That the sweeping .of a moored minefield is far easier than
sweeping a ground minefield ;
3rd. That the sweeping of a moored minefield, if carried out in the
proper way, can be considered 100% safe ;
Nok-Speaking strictly, a channel can only be declared safe
at the time when it is cleared. One cannot guarantee that
the channel in the future will remain so. Some evil person
may lay mines-as in fact has been done in this case-and
there is also the very remote possibility of a mine which went
to the bottom when laid, rising to "correct" depth later on.

[Source edition page 49]

Eut if such eventualities were to be taken into account, it
would mean that no waters could be declared safe, and mined
areas could never be used any more ;
4th. That this charnel was swept for troopships and supplies to
pass through for the Italian front,
we assume that the clearing was camed out with the greatest possible
care.
and (c) the risk of encountering floating mines in this chanfiel
owing to the $roximity of the old minefields, and to
study the German documents in order to obtain information from them concerning the ty$es of mines laid
in those minefields.
The presence of moored Italian minefields off Corfu explains the
possibility of floating mines in this area. We cannot see, however,
that the possible presence of floating mines could be connected with
the mining of H.M.S. Saumarez and H.M.S. Volage, as the nature of
the damage sustained by the above ships excludes the faintest possibility of its cause being a floating mine.
It is often thought thatsfloating mines are a serious danger to shipping.
This is entirely wrong.
To Our knowledge, it has not been definitely proved that more than
one single ship steaming on a straight course (as was the case with
l,
Saumarez and Volage), has been damaged by a floating mine, although
thousands have been afloat during the two great wars.
Admittedly, there are ten more cases of ships having been struck by
alleged floating mines ; but these cases have not been proved.
Apart from other obvious reasons, such as the very minute space of
sea occupied by a mine, the ease with which it is seen in daylight and
its normally harmless condition, there is the fact that the bow wave
bnishes the mine clear of the ship.
Extensive practical tests have proved that it is impossible to ram a
floating mine, however hard one tries.
Whatever the possibility may be of two mines from the old German
minefield floating about, it is, as stated above, of no interest in this
case, as the damage done to the two ships could not possibly be caused
by floating mines.
A close study of the German docunlents diows :
I. That until October 23rd, I~Mo,n ly Italian mines were laid in the
North Corfu Channel area ;
l The Belty Hindley, October 1947.
143

[Source edition page 50]

2. That GY types of mines were available at Trieste on April 25th,
194.5 ;
3. No manufacturer's numbers are shown in these documents.
,Vote.-Each mine has a number stamped on the bottom plate. The
Germans had a very elaborate spstem of tabulating al1 particulars of the
mines on so-called Kennkarten. If those cards could be traced for the
Adriatic Zone, one could compare the numbers on the bottom plates
of the swept mines with these Kennkarten in order to find out the place
of origin of the mines that were laid in North Corfu Channel.
Q~lestion( 2). 1-ou are reqzresfed to examine the information and docniments available concerning tlze navigation of the Mauritius,
the Saumarez and the Volage, in order to ascertain wltat
conclusions, if any, may be drawn concerning the identify
of the type of mines which strnick the two last-named
z-essels with the type of mines discovered on Noaember 13flt,
1946, and to state how fur, in yozcr opinion, these conclusions can be regarded as oalid.
. .
-1lthough the log-books of APatcritizds, Leander and 1701age show
some inaccuracies in speed and course, we consider it beyond any
doubt that Saumarez and Volage were mined in approsimately the
positions indicated in Annex g to the United Kingdom Memorial.
Even if both ships were mined nearer the northern edge of the
channel, they would still have been victims of the two lines of mines
shomn in Annes g.
Our conclusion, therefore, is definite : that both ships were struck
by the type of mine which was swept on November 13th, 1946.
Qtrestion (3). 1-OU are requested to examine the information and documents aziailable relating to tlze danzage sugered by the
Saumarez and tlze Volage, and fo the fragments of n
mine found in tlze Volage, with a aiew to ascertaining
wltat conclusions, if any, may be drawn regarding tlze
type of mines which strzrck these aessels, and how fur
these co~tcl~rsio~cazsn , in yozrr opinion, be regarded as valid.
(3) AXSWER:
-4s far as it is possible to estimate the damage sustained by Sazrmare:
and I'olage, which were ships of modern construction, this damage
must have been caused by the esplosion of a moored contact mine
of approximately 600 lb. charge. The reasons for this are :

[Source edition page 51]

1st. A ground mine would not cause this type of damage, and
certainly not at this depth of water ;
2nd. A floating mine can be excluded altogether, as previously
explained ;
3rd. The only remaining possibility is a moored contact mine.
Of the fragments found in Volage, the two small, slightly curved
pieces are obviously not parts of a mine shell ; for they are of cast iron.
The third piece, which is part of a horn adapter, fits closely to the homs
and elements of a GY mine or of a GR mine, the adapters of these two
types of mine being identical.
Question (4). You are requested to examine tlze qwstims whether it is
possible to draw (a) from the Positiolt of the mines swept on
Noaember 13th, 1946 ; (b) from the fact that a complete
mineclearafice of the Albanian waters in this area had not
yet been carried out ut that time; and (c) from the passage of
the Mauritius on the zznd October, 1946, without striking
any mine, any conclusions, and, if so, what conclusions,
regarding the existence of a methodicdly laid minefield and
the object for which, in the light of tlze disposition of the
mines, the9 appear to have been laid.
The position of the mines swept on the 13th November, 1946, strongly
indicates that the mines were methodically laid in two rows.
Any previous minesweeping in the Medri Route Channel would
necessarily have detected such mines, if they had been laid at that time.
The minefield was skilfully placed, as if its combined object was :
(1) offensive : to stop ships drawing some IO feet or more from passing
through the channel; (2) defensive : to stop ships of the same draught
from entering Saranda Bay.
That Mauritius passed unmolested through the minefield only shows
she had good luck. There is nothisg strange in a ship getting through
a minefield with a densiiy of mines as indicated by the sweep.
Question (5). From the state of the mines sze~epto n h70z~ember1 3th, 1946,
can you draw any conclusions, and, if so, what conclusions,
as to the date on which they were moored, and, in particular,
on the question whether they ulere moored before or aftej
the ~2ndO ctober, 1946 ?
The condition of the mines swept during the sweeping operation on
the 13th November, 1946, as shown in Supplement No. 6 of the Security
Council Officia1 Records, leads to the conclusion that the mines should
be considered as recently laid.
145

[Source edition page 52]

1f7e are not in a position to give even an approximate date for the
minelaying. The amount of barnacles, growth, rust, etc., is dependent
on many factors which Vary considérably with prevailing conditions.
Only actual tests at the same time of the year and in the same waters
could give sufficient information to afford a rough estimate of the age
of the minefield.
1Vith nothing more than general information, al1 we are prepared
to state with certainty is that the mines cannot possibly belong to a
minefield laid during the war.
The question whether the mines were laid before or after the
22nd October, 1946, cannot possibly be answered. The state of the
mines would certainly not alter noticeably from the 21st to the 23rd of
October.
Question (6). Having regard to the replies given, by agreement between
the Parties, to the qz~estionsc oncerning the position of the
sztn at Sibenik on October 17th and 18th, 1946, and on the
basis 01 the docz~mentsi n the case, does the examination
of the factztal circumstances concerning (a) the date, (b)
the time of day, (c) the lie of the land, (d) the conditions
of visibility, (e) the position of the objects (ships, mines,
horns, rails), (f) their form, coloztr and dimensions, lead
yozt to the conclusion that, in the circumstances in which
the witness Kovacic wm sitztated, it was possible for him
to see the loading and the presence of GY mines on board
two ships of the "M"-class in Panikovac Cove and the
rails on the ships ?
(6) AKSWER:
'The following could have been seen :
1. At 16.15 hours:
(a) The two ships of the "JI"-class, if moored at Panikovac Cove ;
(b) the mine-bodies and sinkers on board these ships ;
(c) the loading of the mines.
These observations could easily have been made, whichever of the three courses indicated on map N.I.D. 14/32/48>
Annex C in File E.1111172, was followed by the launch.
Provided that the ships were moored on the northern side
of the Cove, as stated by the witness Kovacic, also :
(d) that the mines were newly painted (the gloss).
If the launch had followed course (i), it would have passed
within about 4jo metres of the Cove, and then
(e) horns and rails could have been seen, although idintly.
If either of courses (ii) or (iii) was followed, we think it
must have been impossible to see horns or raiis.
I4 6

[Source edition page 53]

II. At 17.35 h0~r.S:
Given no obstacles in the line of sight :
(f) It would perhaps be possible from Kenc's house to see the
silhouettes of the ships loaded with mines.
The above conclusions (a) to (f) are based upon tests made at
"Naval Base A" (see Annex rl) which were carried out at a time corresponding to 17.28 hours in Sibenik, on October 18th, 1946, and
under similar circumstances.
Possible obstructions to the line of sight :
Three different opinions have been given by the Parties as to the
possible position of the ships at 17.35 hours.
1. Ships moored along the south-western pier. In this case the
configuration of the land woüld prevent the ships from being
seen.
2. Ships moored in the most westerly part of the north-eastern
pier, where they also wodd have been hidden.
3. Ships moored along the "built-up" extension of tlie north-eastern
9UaY.
From the documents tïled with the Court-espcial:y Annex 4 (V),
File E.II/1/77 - we think that the statement made by the United Kingdom expert in Appendix z to Annex 1, File E.I1/1/89, as to the configuration of the land, appears to be the more correct. In that case
the silhouettes of the ships may partly have been seen from Keric's
house.
A more definite statement cannot be made without inspection of
the locality.
Question (7). You are requested to state your opinion as to
(a) the r~umber of GY mines which a minelayer of the
"M"-class could load.
(7) (a) ANSWER:
We assume that the "W-class ships are of about 130 tons, in which
case the dimensions given in the Swedish Marinkalender would be
approximately correct.
According to these dimensions, the number of GY mines these minelayers can take would be. twenty, if stability allowed for this top weight.
(b) the time required by h o shifis of this clas, emh
possessing a derrick and a steam winch, a d lying
apfiroximately in the positions iftdicated by the m'tness
Kovacic, to take their complete load of mines.
(7) (b) ANSWER:
Under normal conditions, it should be possible to load oce mine with
one derrick in 14 minutes' time. This time is based upon a g~eantu mber
Not reproduced.
147

[Source edition page 54]

of actual reports from Our three navies, and the times are remarkably
consistent.
Under less favourable conditions, the time required should not be
more than 3 minutes per mine per derrick.
We assume that the full load of mines could have been taken on board
within an hour.
and (c) whether GI' mines are normally fitted with lzorns wherz
they are loaded on ships, or wlzetlzer, on the contrary,
they norntally have to be fitted with the horns at the
time when they are moored.
(7) (c) ANSWER:
Guards to the horns are not fitted to GY mines.
These mines are loaded with or without horns in place, according
to the rules laid down by the authorities concerned. In Our opinion,
the safest procedure would be to unscrew the bakelite covers and screw
in the horns after the mines were on board.
This requires approximately 5 minutes per mine per unskilled person
and could be done at any time before the mines are laid.
Question (8) (i). On the assumption that the mines discovered on November 13th, 1946, were laid at some date within the fm
preceding months, whoever may have laid them, you
are reqwsted to examine the information available
regarding (a) the number and the naizcre of the mines,
(b) the means for laying them, alzd (c)t he time required
to do so, having regard to the dieerent states of the sea,
the conditions of the locality, and the diflcrent weather
conditions, and to ascertain whether it is possible in that
way to draw any conclusions, and, if so, whd conclusions, in regard to-(i) the means employed for layingthe
mine field discovered cm ATovember qth, 1946.
(8) (i) ANSWER
There is no doubt that the 24 or more GY mines which were laid
at Saranda, were placed in their position by means of surface craft.
The laying of GY mines is not done by submarine or by aircraft.
The time necessary to lay those mines is approximately the same as
the time taken to steam the distance between the points where the
mine barrage is to be laid, plus the necessary time to approach and
leave the area of vigilance and to take fixes.
The total time that the minelayers would be in the waters between
Cape Kiephali and San Giorgio Monastery amounts to about two and
a half hours at a speed of six knots, if the ships are approaching from
the North and leaving towards the North.

[Source edition page 55]

If they approached frorn the South the time would be about two
hours from the neighbourhood of Barchetta Rock to the northern end
of the minefield, provided they left towards the South.
If the ships approached the area of vigilance from the North and
left towards the South, the time necessary between Cape Kiephali
and San Giorgio Monastery would be about two hours.
If the ships approached from the South and left towards the North,
the time would be about two hours.
Questiota (8) (ii). and to (ii) the possibility of mooring those mines
with those means zithout the Albanian authorities
being aware of it, having regard to tlze extent of the
measures of vigilance existing in the Saranda region.
(8) (ii) AXSWER:
The possibility of seeing the operation. The Corfu Channel can be
navigated with no great difficulty, when it iç a question of simply
passing through. But to place a minefield accurately, as was done,
requires a reasonably good visibility so that definite cross-bearings on
the coast can be taken, as there is only one lighthoiise in the 1-icinity.
The necessary landmarks would probably be at a greater distance
away than the distance from the fix (taken before starting the minelaying) to the shore : for instance, the Monastery and Limion Point
might be selected. Incidentally, one row of mines does actually point
to both of these landmarks. Another bearing might be taken on
the north-west promontory of Denta Point. Of course, objects can
be seen much more clearly when looking seawards than when looking
landwards.
The minelayer must have passed at about 500 metres off the coast
between Denta Point (an obvious place for a look-out) and the
San Giorgio Monastery.
From this part of the coast the minelaying could easily have been
observed by a look-out with ordinary hinoculars.
The ships would probably have kept t~ the swept channel and
might therefore also have been seen from Cape Kiephali and even
more so from the San Giorgio hIonastery ; for if the eastern line of
mines was laid frorn the South, the minelayer must probably have
been within half a mile of the Monastery.
If the minelaying was done in darkness, it is doubtful whether it
could have been observed from Porto Edda.
If done in daylight, it can unhesitatingly be said that the operation
must have been noticed bÿ the Albanian authorities.
The possibility of hearing. The most favourable conditions for
liearing a minelaying operation would be :
(a) dead quiet in the immediate vicinity of the observer ;
149

[Source edition page 56]

(b) wind blowing off shore (no surf) ;
wind force 3 or less (scale Beaufort) ;
(c)
(d) people ashore suspecting some action to be going on, and being
on the alert ;
(e) people on board minelayers not skilful (unnecessary lights
and noises) ;
(f) where echoes strengthen the sound.
Tests which we have canied out at "Naval Base B" (see Annex 2 l)
under similar conditions to those stated above show that rail noise
could be heard faintly at a distance of about 1,200 metres, while a
splash could be heard faintly only at about 650 metres.
Additional noises quickly reduce the audibility.
Accordingly, under favourable conditions it would be possible to
hear the minelaying operation from Limion Point and from the coast
b-e tweenDenta Point and San Giorgio Monastery, but not from Porto
- -
Edda.
Under less favourable conditions it would, however, be impossible
to hear the minelaying from any of the positions mentioned.
We are not in the possession of sufficient information as to conditions when the mines were laid to give a more definite statement.
This Report was drawn up in English in one copy, at the Peace
Palace, The Hague, this eighth day of January, one thousand nine
hundred and forty-nine.
(Signed) S. ELFFERICH. J. BULL. AND. FORSHELL.
(Signed) S. T. CROSS,
Secretary of .the Cornmittee.
'
Not reproduced.

[Source edition page 57]

DECISION OF THE COURT, DATED JANUARY 17th, 1949,
REGARDING AN ENQUIRY ON THE SPOT.
The Court requests the Experts appointed by the Order of the,17th
December, 1948, to proceed to Sibenik and Saranda, and to make, on
the land and in the waters adjacent to these two places, any investigations and, so far as possible, any experiments which they may
consider useful with a view to verifying, completing and, if necesary, modifying the answers given in their Report filed by them on
-
January 8th, Ï949.
The Parties shall have the right to make suggestions to the Experts
regarding the points to which their investigations and experiments
should be directed.
The Registrar, with the authority of the President, shall make the
preparations required for the journey of the Experts and for ensuring
that they will receive a11 the facilities essential to the due and prompt
accomplishment of their mission.
IVithin one week of the filing of the complementary Report of the
Experts in the Registry, the Parties may file in the Registry their observations upon any new statements which it may contain.

[Source edition page 58]

EXPERTS' REPORT DATED FEBRUARY 8th, 1949, ON THE
INVESTIGATIONS AND TESTS AT SIBENIK AND SARANDA.
appointed by Order of Court of Decernber 17th, 1948, visited Sibenik
and Saranda in pursuance of the Court's decision of January 17th, 1949.
They have the honour to subrnit to the Court a report on the observations made and tests carried out by them.
Investigations were made as to the following points :
1. At Sibenik on January 24th and 25th, 1949
(a) Length of the quays at Panikovac Cove ;
(b) existence of a "built-up quay" ;
(c) depth of water alongside the quays in Panikovac Cove ;
(d) existence of a wreck or of obstructions alongside the southwestern quay ;
(e) configuration of the land at Panikovac Cove ;
(f) general lay-out of the tunnels at Panikovac Cove;
(g) what could be seen of an "Mt'-class minelayer moored in
Panikovac Cove, during the course of the journey by motor
boat past the Cove, following :
(1) route (i),
(2) route (iii),
as these routes are described in Annex C to the document
filed in the Registry on November 27th, 1948, and headed :
"Agreed answers to questions in connexion with state of Sun
at Sibenik" ;
(h) possibility of mooring a motor launch at Kulina Point ;
(2) a general inspection of "M 2" ;
(j) the line of sight from Keric's terrace, and what could be
seen from the tenace in broad daylight, and at the end of
civil twilight on January qth, 1949 (17.30 hours) ;
(k) the time required for walking from Mo10 Krka, via Kovacic's
house, to Keric's house ;
II. At Saranda on Janzcary 28th and zgth, 1949 :
(a) Survey of the Coast from Limion Hill to San Giorgio
Monastery ;
(b) \-kit to the Monastery by land ;
(c) visit to Denta Point by land ;
(d) possibility of observing, from the San Giorgio Monastery,
the passage of a ship by night along the line on which the
eastern row of mines was laid (as shown in Annex 9 of the
United Kingdom Memorial) ;
(e) a landing at Denta Point to check the accuracy of observations
made of this area from the sea ;
152

[Source edition page 59]

(f) survey of the coast from Saranda to Cape Kiephali ;
(g) visit to Limion Hill ;
(h) visit to Saranda lighthouse.
The attached sketch (Annex 1 shows the situation as it was found
l)
to be at Panikovac Col-e.
DETAILS OF INVESTIGATION MENTIONED UNDER 1.
1 (a) The quays were measured and the dimensions found to be
approximately as given by Admiral Moullec (dimensions are shown
in Annex 1
l).
At the north-eastern quay, standard small-gauge rails and minetransport cars were observed ; the latter were evidently not of the
type used to transport German GY mines.
-
1 (b) No "built-up quay" was observed, nor were any remnants
seen such as would indicate the previous existence of such a quay.
1 (c) Soundings of the depth of water alongside the quag s were
taken at low tide, and are shown in Annes 1 Difference etween
l.
high and low water : approximately 60 cm.
1 (d) There were no traces of any wrecks or obstructions alongside
the south-western quay.
1 (e) The configuiation of the land was such that, at 16.06 hours
on January qth, 1919, a ship moored an'where in Panikovac Col-e
would be in the shade. On this dai; and at this time, the altitude of
the sun was 7" 6'.
Note.-16.06 hours on Januarjr 24th, was 55 minutes before
sunset ; 16.20 hours on October ~gth1,9 46, was also
55 minutes before sunset.
1 (f) The entrances to the tunnels were measured. The rails
leading to them appeared to be in working order and had probably
been used not long before. This was proved by the absence of mst,
which was apparent on the rails mentioned under 1 (a).
The fact that the floor of the tunnels was covered with iron sheeting
prevented rails from being observed.
The tunnel led to a widened excavation which the esperts did not
insist on examining entirely. But they were able to see old ammunition
and ground mines stored in the tunnel and modem German ground
mines (oval) stored in the excavation.
Electnc light was installed in the tunnels, but was not working at
the time of Our visit. Observations were made with the aid of a single
electric torch and details could not be seen \-ery distinctly.
Not reproduced.

[Source edition page 60]

The following colzclusions can be drawn fiom the above obsewations ut
Pa7tikaiac Coae :
(i) An "M"-class minelayer could have been moored along the
south-western or along the north-eastern quay. The best place
for loading would be the south-western quay, which is closest
to both tunnels. If loading were to be done simultaneously
from both tunnels, the quickest way to load two "M"-class
minelayers would be to moor them alongside the south-western
quay, one astern of the other.
As there is no "built-up quay", two ships could not be moored
along the north-eastem quay, one behind the other.
(ii) The gloss of newly painted mines codd not have been observed
at any tirne after 16.15 hours on October ~gth,1 946; for at
that time the ships were in the shade.
(iii) The entrantes to the tunnels were wide enough to permit their
being used to accommodate German GY mines. If both GY
mines (moored mines) and ground mines were stored in the
excavations, it would be feasible to stow the moored mines in
the widened area and the others in the tunnel itself. If this
were done and if the GY mines had to be loaded, the ground
mines would have to be cleared from the tunnel and placed
temporarily on the quay-side, in order to remove the GY mines.
Note.-The Yugoslav representative said that it was impossible to carry out tests with GY mines (e.g., loading
on board ship), since no such mines were available.
1 (g) Observations were made as to visibility while passing Panikovac
Cove in a launch, at various distances, as shown in Annex C to the
document filed in the Registry on November 27th, 1948, and mentioned
above.
At 16.16 hours on January 24th, 1949, the first trip was made on
route (i). The altitude of the Sun at the moment was 6" 1'.
The "M 2" was moored with her stern towards the Sibenik Bay
alongside the north-easter'h quay, and was completely in the shade
of the hills
When passing Panikovac Cove on route (i), the distance from the
launch to the Cove was measured and found to be 520 metres.
At 16.25 hours a second trip was made over the same route.
During both trips it was possible to obsewe :
(a) the "M 2" moored at any place in Panikovac Cove ;
(b) people waiking on the deck of the "M 2".
It would be fiossible to see :
(c) mines being loaded on board the "M 2".
It might be possible to see :
(d) mine bodies and sinkers on board these ships.

[Source edition page 61]

It would have been impossible to see :
(e) that the mines were newly painted ;
(f) horns or rails (ships being in the shade).
A third trip was made at 16.35 hours on January 24th, 1949, on
route (iii).
The altitude of the sun at this moment was 3' 2'.
The "M 2" was moored in the same position and the distance
measured from the launch to the "M 2" was found to be 840 metres.
During this run 'it zeu.~ found possible to observe ships moored in
Panikovac Cove.
It would be possible to observe the actual loading of mines.
No other observations could have been made while following this route.
1 (h) During the preparation for the trips mentioned under 1 (g),
the north-east coast of Mandalina Peninsula was observed. Several
jetties were seen at which a launch could easily be moored. If the
launch calIed at Kulina Point, it would, however, follow route (ii) from
Kulina Point to Mo10 Krka.
We can see no reason why route (i) should be followed. Route (iii)
would be followed if the launch clid not cal1 at Kulina Point.
The distance from route (ii) to Panikovac Cove would be 600 metres
and the possibility of observation would be the same as mentioned
for route (i).
1 (i) The "M 2" was found to be fitted out as a minesweeper.
Minesweeping gear consisted of Oropesa gear for moored mines ; the
minesweeping winch was situated about one metre in front of the
aft mast.
This ship could, however, easily be converttd into a minelayer, and
had for the purpose the following equipment :
(a) a derrick to load mines.
Length of derrick: 7.80 metres. Diameter of shackle: I inch;
(b) props in the deck to fix the sleepers of the mine rails.
These props were well greased, and easily removable ;
(c) length of rails on starboard and port side : each 12.70 metres ;
distance between props : 0.675 metres ;
three joints on either rail ;
no turntables.
These rails are of a sufficient length to accommodate 18-20
GY mines in all.
Although the inside width of rails needed for GY mines is
70 cm. and the distance between the props on "M 2" is 67.5 cm.,
it should be borne in mind that the actual width of the rails
dependr entirely on the construction of the sleepers and the
attachment of the rails to the sleepers. There exist smallgauge rails of which the width can be regulated as required ;
at Sibenik, however, the rails were not available for inspection ;
(d) small wire winches were screwed into the deck, but were easily
removable.
155

[Source edition page 62]

CORFU CHANNEL CASE (MERITS) (ANXES 2) 156
The abozle Zeads ILS to the conclzuio~t fhat GT- mines co~rld be zued
o.ir board "11 2".
1 (j) and (k) The experts visited Keric's house to observe the
view of Panikovac Cove from the terrace. The- went by the same
way as Kovacic said he followed from Mo10 Krka.
Mo10 Krka was reached at 16.43 on January 24th, 1949.
The walk to Kovacic's house took 12 minutes, and that from Kovacic's
house to Keric's house 14 minutes.
tt-entlzev co?ulitions 0% January 2$h, 1949 : cloudless-clear-good
visibility-slight breeze.
On October ~gth,1 946, sunset \vas at 17.15 ; civil twilight Ras
at 17.41.
On January 24th, 1949, sunset \vas 17.01 ; cilil twilight at 17.30.
The follou-ing obserc-ations were made : at 17.30 on January qth,
1949, "11 2" mas not visible from Keric's house ; "JI 2;' was in the
same position as during the afternoon (moored alongside the northeastern qua)-).
"hl 2" \vas then instructed by telephone to move eastmard and to
moor in a position as if a "built-up quay" esisted.
At 17.35, when "M 2" was moored in her nexv position, it \vas still
impossible to observe her from Keric's terrace. This was solely due
to the configuration of the land and not to the visibility conditions.
So long as the ship was moored in the ColTe,o nly the smoke of the
funnel could be seen from Keric's terrace. As a matter of fact, this
was the only proof that the ship was shifting. "AI 2" \vas then instructed
by telephone to leave Panikovac Cove, and at 17.40 her silhouette
became clearly visible when she had left the Cove and reached a part
of Sibenik Ba\- that was not shaded bj- the hills. (See Annes II
l.)
In this position it would have been possible to obserl-e whether the
ship was loaded with mines or not.
Assuming that the "hl"-class ships were at Panikovac Cove and left
the Cove after sunset, the obserz~ationsm ade in Sibefzik lead te the /olloxing
co~tclzcsioizs:
A. "M"-class ships could be used for the minelaj-ing operation.
The tunnels could accommodate GY mines.
B. It is of no importance where and how the "JI"-class ships were
moored in Panikovac Cove, for :
(1) at 16.15 on October ~gth,1 946, it was possible on an? of
the routes (i), (ii) or (iii) to observe the ships and the loading
of mines ;
'
Not reproduced.
156

[Source edition page 63]

(2) at 17.35 on tlie same day it was impossible for ivitness
Kovacic to see anything of the ships wherever they might
be moored in Panikovac Cove.
The arguments concerning :
the way the ships ivere moored ;
wrecks or obstructions alongside tlie south-western qiiay ;
the configuration of tlie land ;
jetties at KuIina Point ;
visibility at 17.3j hours while witness Kovacic ivas at Keric's
liouse ;
esistence of "built-up quay",
are of no material importance.
C. The only possibility of observing the "M"-class ships froni
Keric's terrace rvould not be when they ivere in the COI-e, but
when they had left it. Witness Kovacic stated that it became
too dark to see the ships leave the Cove. On the contrary, it
would only be after their departure, when they had left tlie
portion of Sibenik Bay shaded by the hills around the Cove,
that they could have been observed.
II. -4T S.9R.4NDA OH JANUARY 28th AND 2gth, 1949.
II (a) -4 trip along the coast by sea, from Saranda, past Liniion
Hill to San Giorgio Jlonastery, was made on January 28th.
The route followed is shown in Annex III l; and passed throiigli
the positions A, B, C, D, and back to Saranda.
The following were observed :
I. battery at a position just west of Saranda ;
2. fort Likiirski, a i-ery conspicuous landmark ;
3. lighthouse south of Likurski ;
4. houses at Denta Point ;
5. a landing beach near Denta Point ;
6. San Giorgio &lonasterj-, very conspicuous against the sky.
Attention is drawn to the fact that the course followed coincicles
with the direction of the eastern row of mines. This course was easily
checked bj. heading for the Jfonastery and keeping Limion Hill right
astern, or vice versa.
II (b) After making a general survev of the coast from Saranda-
Limion Hill-San Giorgio IIonasterj7, it was decided to examine
furtlier the points coted. On January 28th, a trip \vas made from
Saranda to San Giorgio 3Ionastery ; the foot of the liill, on which
this is situated, can be reached by car in about 25 minutes. From
there, a patli leads up to the llonastery. The walk to the top takes
9 minutes. Mules use this track. 3n reaching the actual ItIonastery,
the party- found the door closed. The Albanian authorities tried in
l Not reproduced.

[Source edition page 64]

vain to get those inside to open the door. Permission was then
requested and obtained to force the door and this was done. The
Monastery was occiipied by six soldiers, but there was accommodation
for many more ; it had telephone communication. A stable for mules
was seen.
During a general survey around the Monastery, the following were
observed :
(a) Infantry defences just outside the building.
(b) If the look-out posts were stationed outside the Monastery,
thev would be able to watch only part of the Bay of Saranda,
as a number of trees partly obstructed the line of sight. It
was therefore obvious that another place would be used to
watch the sea traffic close to the Monastery. This place was
a look-out tower inside the Monastery ; it was equipped with
benches and this higher spot afforded a much clearer view over
the Corfu Strait and Bay of Saranda, and was not obstructed
by trees to the same extent.
The Albanian authorities said that the men in the Monastery slept
there during the night and only watched the seavduring the day-time.
This statement, however, does not seem quite to coincide with the
difficulties experienced in obtaining entrance at the door of the
Monastery earlier in the day.
II (c) and (e) On the way back from the Monastery, the experts
desired to test the observation off the houses that had been noticed
on Denta Point. As far as could be seen, no suitable path existed,
leading to the houses observed from the sea.
It was therefore decided to approach Denta Point from the sea
side. On January 29th, a trip was made by motor ship with a rowingboat in tow. A landing was made near Denta Point on a small beach
(see Annex III l). From here, two paths, which are used by mules,
lead over the slopes of Denta Pomt to the houses. It only took a
couple of minutes from the shore to the lowest situated house. Here
were seen :
(i) infantry defence line and machine-gun posts ;
(ii) an old house with a roof, capable of accommodating men and
mules ;
(iii) places where a fire could be lighted ;
(iv) a newspaper Bashkimi dated September t th, 1948, was found
in the trenches.
At this place one has a clear view over the whole of the Corfu Strait,
as well as the Bay of Saranda.
The above fmts point to the conclusion that guards or look-out posts
were kept at Denta Point until September th, 1948.
Attention is drawn to the fact that the Experts' Report of January 8th,
1949, called this spot an "obvious place" to keep a look-out, as it
commanded the Corfu Strait as weil as Saranda Bay.
1 Not reproduced.
158

[Source edition page 65]

-Vote.-X second house which was much bigger than the
former and could be used as quarters, was situated
higher up the slope. This house was not visited by
the experts.
II (d) In the evening of January 28th, a test of visibility by night
from San Giorgio Monastery was carried out.
Weathev conditions : cloudless ; slight breeze ; no moon.
The ship mentioned above was again used. Al1 lights were extinguished. One of the experts, and the Parties' experts, went to San
Giorgio Monastery to test the degree of visibility, while the other expert
travelled on the ship along a line identical with that on which the
eastern row of mines had been laid (see Annex g of the United Kingdom
Memorial).
The party for the Monastery left Saranda about three quarters of
an hour before the ship sailed. On arriving at the ship in Saranda,
the other party received a telephone message from the Monastery
confirming that the first party had arrived.
On their way up the hi11 to the Monastery, the first party was halted
by two soldiers with rifles. This occurrence did not seem to taliy
with the statement made' that afternoon that the men slept during
the night.
The course of the ship dong the eastem line of mines was easily
checked with the aid of:
the background of Limion Hill ;
Saranda lighthouse ;
Cape Kiephali ;
San Giorgio Monastery ;
Denta Point ;
Tignoso lighthouse.
The ship was completely blacked out.
Note.-This is the most favourable condition for the avoidance
of detection. For usually a minelayer, like al1 oiland coal-burning vessels, would emit some smoke from
its funnels ; and, as a rule, some sort of light would
be used on a small ship during the actual minelaying
operation.
While the ship was following a course towards the Monastery, the
line of sight from that observation post was partly obstructed by trees
(see Annex IV
l).
The noise of the motor was already heard from the Monastery at
22.20 hours (distance 1,800 metres). The ship was sighted for a very
short while at 22.26 hours (distance 670 metres). It was not possible
on this occasion to observe the ship for long, as it disappeared behind
the trees (see Annex IV
l).
After altering course, it was sighted clearly again from the Monastery
at 22.30 hours (approximate distance 800 metres).
A northerly course was then set and, at 22.47 hours, a signal was
received on board from the Monastery, stating that the ship was out
Not reproduced.
159

[Source edition page 66]

of sight. The distance \vas then calculated from a cro~s~bearintga,k en
at 22.50, from Saranda light and a promontory south of the Monastery,
and the distance at 22.47 hours was found to be approximately 1,900
metres.
Noise of motor was heard at 1,800 metres distance ;
Ship was obserl-ed for the first time at 670 ,metres distance ;
Ship was again clearly seen at 800 metres distance ;
Ship was followed for a distance of 1,900 metres.
-Voir.-This motor ship was only So feet long, had no bridge,
wvheelhouse or fu~inela, nd w\?as very lo\v on the wvater.
II (1) On January 29th, a general survey \vas made of the coast
between Saranda and Cape Kiephali. Xothing extraordinarp was
observed. Here and there were look-out posts which seemed to be
deserted. Pill-boxes were also noticed.
At Cape Kiephali, a house was sighted which would be an ideal place
for a look-out, commanding the whole Medri channel.
II (g) On January ~gtha, w-isit was paid to Limion Hill, where an
old Italian battery was situated.
II (II) In the Experts' Report of January Sth, 1949, it was stated
that only one light existed to guide navigation in Corfu Strait. In
fact, onlr one light is indicated on the -1dniiralty chart.
But Saranda lighthouse \vas found to be working on Jaiiuary ~Sth,
1949 ; it could not, however, be used for a cross-bearing if the minelaying
began from the South, owing to the configuration of the land at Denta
Point.
This lighthouse \vould Iiave been of service if the mines were laid
from the Yorth.
But as no log-book or other documentary information was available,
according to the Albanian authorities, it \vas not possible to state
whether the Saranda light \vas in working order in October 1946.
1. -1 minelaying operation could be carried out in Corfu Channel,
starting :
(a) from the Xorth ;
(b) from the South.
B. On a clear night, on either course, tliere would lia\-e been
sufficient landmarks to take a fis.
C. Pro\-ided a look-out was kept at Cape Kiephali, Denta Point
and San Giorgio Afonastery, and under normal weather conditions for this area, and if the mines were laid from the Xorth
towards the South :
(i) the operation might not be seen by the look-out post at
the foot of San Giorgio lfonastery, because "position 22.47
160

[Source edition page 67]

hours" coincides with the most southerly mine which was
cut (see Annex III ;
l)
(ii) the minelayers would, however, be seen from Cape Kiephali ;
and
(iii) must have been noticed from Denta Point, as the distances
while passing it are within the limits of visibility shown in
summary under II (d).
D. If the minelaying were done from the South (which is most
feasible, as the ships would not have to cross their own minefields if returning to the North), the minelayers would have
been observed from Cape Kiephali, Denta Point and San Giorgio
Monastery. It must be borne in mind that in this case the
ships would have passed the above-mentioned points twice.
The experts consider it to be indisputable that if a normal look-out
was kept at Cape Kiephali, Denta Point, and San Giorgio Monastery,
and if the look-outs were equipped with bi~wcularsa s has been stated,
under mrmal weather conditions for this area, the minelaying operations
shown in Annex g to the United Kingdom Memorial must have been
noticed by these coast-guards.
On the occasion of the experts' visit to San Giorgio Monastery,
the Albanian authorities stated that no binoculars were now available
at that post.
GENERAL.
During the general survey of the coast from Limion Hill to San
Giorgio Monastery on January 28th and from Limion Hill to Cape
Kiephali on January zgth, the experts noticed that Barchetta Rock
was not so easy a point to distinpish as Tignoso lighthouse. But
it happens that in the Reports on Operation Retail (United Kingdom
Memorial, p. 117)~th e positions of al1 the mines swept on November 13th,
1946, are given by bearing and distance from Barchetta Rock. The
experts therefore consulted the Reports on Operation Retail in order
to check the positions in question.
They reached the conclusion that :
I. individual ships taking part in the Operation may have selected
any obvious landmark in plotting the position of a swept mine ;
2. these positions would then be plotted later on a chart of the
whole area of the sweep ;
3. Barchetta Rock, as being the closest landmark to the most
westerly lap of the sweep, was then selected as a dahm dan
(reference point) for tabulating al1 the positions shown on
page 117 of the United Kingdom Memorial ;
Not reproduced.
161

[Source edition page 68]

CORFU CHANNEL CASE (MERITS) (ANNEX 2) 162
4. but any other reference point could just as well have been
used, e.g., Tignoso lighthouse or San Giorgio Monastery.
This Report was drawn up in EngIish in one copy, at the Peace
Palace, The Hague, this eighth day of Febmary, one thousanid nine
hundred and forty-nine.
(Signed) AND. FORSHELL.
(Sig- S. ELFFERICH.

[Source edition page 69]

QUESTIONS PUT BY THREE MEMBERS OF THE COURT
ON FEBRUARY roth, 1949.
(a) By Judge ZoriZiC.
1.-On page 15 of the French text (page 14 of the English text)
the Report amves at certain conclusions. Under heading C it is
stated that, subject to certain conditions:
1. the @eration might not be seen by the look-out post at the
foot of San Giorgio Monastery ;
2. the minelayers would however be seen from Cape Kiephali ; and
3. they must have been noticed from Denta Point.
In paragraph D mention is also made of the mifielayers which would
have been observed.
From this text it would appear that what the guards might have,
or should have, observed was the minelayers, i.e., the ships themselves,
and it seems that the word "operation" in sub-paragraph I refers to
the movements and manoeuvres of the ships.
At the end of the page (and top of next page in English text) it is
stated that if a normal look-out was kept at Cape Kiephali, Denta
Point, and San Giorgio Monastery, and if certain other conditions
were fulfilled : "the minelaying operations . ... must have been noticed
by the coast-guards".
These passages mention "minelaying operations", and it is therefore
important to know what meaning the Experts attach to these words ;
in other words :
Does the conclusion mean that the minelaying ships themselves
(1)
must have been observed by the coast-guards, or
(2) Do the words "minelaying operations" mean that the coastguards must have seen not only the ships and the manoeuvres which
they carried out, but also the actual minelaying, Le., the launching of
the mines into the sea ?
II.-Does the view which is obtainable from Cape Denta enable
one to see certain parts of the Strait, or of Saranda Bay, which would
not be visible either from Cape Kiephali, or from Saranda, or again
from the tower of the old Monastery of San Giorgio ? In other words,
is it not possible to see, from these look-out posts, everything which
would lx visible from Cape Denta ?
(b) By Judge Krylov.
I. Were the houses at Denta Point inhabited ? Why wai the big
house not visited ? Had these houses been recently built ?
'
See pp 160-161.
1 ,, p. 161.

[Source edition page 70]

Please give a fuller description of the old hoiise which was
visited (page II l of the Report).
2. \Vere the infantry line and the machine-gun posts at Denta
Point of recent construction (page IO l, English text) ?
3. \Vhat was the direction of the wind during the observations on
January 28th ? Mention is made of a slight breeze (page II 2,
English text).
4. Had the house that was seen at Cape Kiephali been recently
constructed ? Had it been used as a look-out post ? (Page 13 3,
English text.)
5. On page 14' (English text) the Experts twice make use of the
term normal" with reference to weather conditions. What
is the definition of "normal" conditions ?
6. \Vhy did the Experts think it necessary to submit observations
to the Court relating to the fixing of the positions of mines by
bearing and distance from Barchetta Rock (page 15 =, English
text) ?
7. IVhy would the ships which laid the mines have had to pass
the Albanian Coast talice (page 14 English text) ?
5,
What reply can the Experts give to M. Cot's objection to their
Report of January 8th, 1949 (Distr. 491.9, as regards the audibility
of the operation ? (Page 1111 of Distr. 435 ter.)
1 See p. I 56.
,, .a 139.
,. ,, 160.
4 ,, pp. 160 and 161.
,, p. 161.

[Source edition page 71]

EXPERTS' REPLIES, DATED FEBRUAKY uth, 1949,
TO QUESTIONS PUT BY THREE MEMBERS OF THE COURT.
who were appointed by the Court's Order of December 17th, 1948,
and who visited Sibenik and Saranda in pursuance of the Court's
decision of January 17th, 1949, have the honour to reply as follows
to the questions which were put to them in the Registrar's letter of
February ~oth,1 949.
1. Questions put by Judge Krylov.
The houses at Denta Po&.
(a)
The experts did not see any advantage in visiting the bigger of these
houses, or in asking if it was inhabited, or for what use it is intended.
In truth, the facts they had ascertained in regard to the existence of
the look-out post appeared to them sufficient for the purposes of their
enquiry. The only reason why they referred, incidentally, to this house
in their report was in order to confirm the fact that Denta Point is
not inaccessible.
@) Date of co?zstrz~ction.
By the term "old house" (building situated at the look-out post)
the experts meant that it was certainly built earIier than 1946. It
seemed to them unnecessary to seek for greater accuracy.
In regard to the bigger house, the experts thought it unnecessary
to estimate or to make enquiries in regard to the date of its construction,
for the reasons given above in paragraph (a). They are, however,
able to state that, as seen from the sea, it seemed to be of more recent
construction than the building situated at the look-out post.
Description of the "old house".
(c)
The dimensions of the "old house" were approximately as follows :
Length : IO m. ; width : 2.50 m. ; height : 2.50 m. It is used as a
stable. In front of the door, which is situated in the narrow face
of the house looking towards the South-West, there is a place used
for fires.
The experts considered it useless to spend time in examining the
"old house" in closer detail.
The infantry trenches and the machine-gun posts at Denta Point
are in an excellent state, though that does not mean that they are
of recent construction. In truth, the same poor vegetation which
165

[Source edition page 72]

one finds everywhere on this rocky coast grows also on the parapet
of the trench, made of the excavated soil.
Moreover, the experts were informed that these defence lines had
been constructed by the Italian troops.
Ad 3.
The very slight breeze was blowing from the N.-E.
Ad 4.
The experts saw no purpose in prolonging their investigations by
asking to go on shore at Cape Kiephali. The observations the'; had
made at Denta Point, together with the remarks given in their report
under No. II (f),s eemed to them sufficient for the needs of their enquiry.
Ad 5.
According to the Mediterranean Pilot, Volume III, one can consider
the following weather conditions as being normal.
(a) Wind.
During surnrner, north-westerly winds are most prevale,nt, but in
winter those from the South-East. In settled summer weather, when
the barometer is high, and often in winter, land and sea breezes prevail.
The land wind is light and, near the Corfu Channel, it blows from
North to North-East. It begins to blow two or three hours after
sunset, and increases in force until after midnight, when it decreases,
falls calm at sunrise, freshens again as the Sun gets higher, veering
some points eastward until about g a.m., after which it dies away and
is succeeded by the sea breeze.
(b) Clouds.
When land and sea breezes prevail, there is little cloud.
South-east wind may be accompanied by rainfall, and an overcast
sky may be expected, the average for October being 40 % covered
with clouds.
(c) Visibility.
Visibility is usually good in the Adriatic, except when the Bora
blows and causes rainfall. Ex,ceptionally good visibility often occurs
on the Dalmatian coast.
Note.-The Bora is a local wind which can blow very strongly
from the North-East for about 15 or 20 hours, with
heavy squalls. thunder, lightning and rain at intervals.
It generally dispels any hovering clouds or fog, and
when it blows with great force the weather is very
clear.
(d) Conclz4sions.
The experts when mentioning "normal" weather conditions under
paragraph D of their conclusions on page 15 l (English text) have
'
See p. 161.
r 66

[Source edition page 73]

therefore in mind the following weather : clouds 3-4110th-visibility
good (20 miles)-no fog or rainfall-slight easterly breeze.
Ad 6.
From the position of the mines indicated in the United Kingdom
Memorial, Barchetta Rock is not sufficiently visible to be used for
taking fixes. Why, then, it may be asked, does the Memorial calculate
the positions of the mines with reference to that rock ?
The experts thought they should seek an answer to that question.
They found it, and gave it in their report, in order to fqrestall any
question about it.
Ad 7.
As stated in the Experts' Report of January 8th, 1949, under (8) (i),
there are four operational possibilities for laying mines in the Corfu
Strait. They are :
1. Approach from the North and leaving towards the North ;
II. Approach from the North and leaving towards the South;
III. Approach from the South and leaving towards the South ;
IV. Approach from the South and leaving towards the North.
In order to carry out the operations mentioned under 1 and III
the ships would have had to pass the area of vigilance twice. If the
operations under II and IV were carried out, the ships would pass
the area of vigilance only once.
If the area of operations is approached from either North or South
and the ships carrying out the operations leave again either to the
North or South, they can adopt two methods of laying the mines:
(a) from the North ;
(b) from the South.
Operation 1 is discussed as regards method (a) and as regards method (b)
in the Experts.' Report of February 8th, 1949, A to D of Section II.
If operation III was carried out by method (a) or by method (b) the
conclusions contained in the Experts' Report of February 8th would
have been as follows :
Conclusions A and B.-No change.
Colzclusiort C.-Provided that a look-out was kept at Cape Kiephali,
Denta Point and San Giorgio Monastery, and under normal weather
conditions for this area, and if the mines were laid from the North
towards the South
(i) the operation might not be seen by the look-out post at the
foot of San Giorgio Monastery ;
(ii) the operation would not be seen from Cape Kiephali ;
(iii) the minelayers must have been noticed from Denta Point.
Co?iclzcsim D.-If minelaying was carried out from the South towards
the North, the minelayers would have to take a fix and plot this fix
south of a point at which the actual minelaying operation would start.
167

[Source edition page 74]

CORFU CHANNEL CASE (MERITS) (ANNEX 2) 168
As this fix was the reference point for this particular minelaying operation, it had to be in line with the row of mines and consequently
much closer to the San Giorgio Monastery than the position of the
most southerly mine, as indicated in Annex 9 of the United Kingdom
Memorial.
In this case
(i) the ships must have been observed by look-out posts from San
Giorgio Monastery and from Denta Point ;
(ii) the operation would not be observed from Cape Kiephali.
It must be borne in mind that in this case the ships would have
passed the above-mentioned points twice, with the exception of Cape
Kiephali.
A comparison of operations I and III :
Operation I. Operation III
(a) Minelaying from the North : (a) Minelaying from the North :
I. Operation rnight not be seen I. Operation might not be seen
by the look-out at San Gior- by the look-out at San Giorgio Monastery. gio Monastery.
2. Minelayers would be seen 2. Operation would not be seen
from Cape Kiephali. from Cape Kiephali.
3. Minelayer must have been 3. Minelayer must have been
seen from Denta Point. seen from Denta Point.
(b) Minelaying from the South : (b) Minelaying from the South :
I. Minelayers would be seen by I. Minelayers must have been
the look-out at San Giorgio seen by the look-out at San
Monastery. Giorgio Monastery.
2. Minelayer must have been 2. Minelayer must. have been
seen from Denta Point. seen by the look-out from
Denta Point.
3. Minelayers would have been 3. Operation would not have
seen from Cape Kiephali. been seen from Cape Kiephali.
The difference between operation 1 and operation III is that when
a ship approached the area from the South, she would not be observed
by a look-out post situated at Cape Kiephali. In both cases, the
look-out posts at Denta Point must have seen the minelayers ; in
other words, the minelayers could not have escaped the notice of the
look-out posts at Denta Point, and if the minelaying were started
from the South, it must in both cases have been seen from the San
Giorgio Monastery.
168

[Source edition page 75]

II. Qpestions put by Judge ZoriEiO.
Ad 1.
Bv the term "the operation" in conclusion C (i) the experts meant
the whole of the minelaying operation (i.e., both the manoeuvres of
the ships and the actual launching of the mines).
By employing the term "minelayers" in paragraphs C (ii) and C (iii),
the experts intended to indicate that the ships which were used for
the minelaying operation would in case C (ii), or must in case C (iii.)
have drawn the attention of the look-out posts.
From Cape Kiephali the view extends over the whole of the Strait,
but not over Saranda Bay. From Saranda the view extends over the
bay, but not over the whole of the Strait. From the San Giorgio
Monastery the view extends over the whole of the Strait and over the
greater part of the bay.
But Denta Point, which projects further than the other promontories, commands both the whole of the Strait and the whole of the
bay. The investigation has confirmed the conclusion which was
derived from a study of the map : this spot is very suitable for a lookout post.
III. Qpesdon put by Judge EEer.
In their Report of January 8th, 1949, the experts concluded that,
having regard to the insufficiency of the information available as to
the conditions under which the mines were laid, it was not possible
to give a precise opinion concerning the possibility of hearing the
minelaying operations.
After their visit to Saranda, the experts added nothing further on
this subject. They confirm that they have nothing to add. The
conclusions which they have drawn in regard to the possibility of
seeing the operation appear to them to deprive the question whether
the operation could be heard of any further importance.
In these circumstances, they think it unnecessary to reply to the
objections on this subject that have been made in regard to their
report of January 8th, 1949 ; at the same time, thev do not for a moment
admit that these objections are justified.
Done in English, in one copy, at the Peace Palace, The Hague, this
twelfth dav of February, one thousand nine hundred and forty-nine.
