ILIA NORMALIZED LEGAL TEXT

Document ID: gc-iv-1949
Title: Geneva Convention IV of 12 August 1949
Chinese title: 1949年日内瓦第四公约
Issuing body: International Committee of the Red Cross
Official source: https://www.icrc.org/sites/default/files/external/doc/en/assets/files/publications/icrc-002-0173.pdf
Database version: public-international-law-v1.0.1-normalized-2026.09.24

NOTICE
This is an ILIA-generated normalized text for offline legal research.
It is not an official edition. Source-edition page markers are retained
only as factual verification locators. Verify quotations against the
official source linked above.

========================================================================

[Source edition page 155]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 151
GENEVA CONVENTION
relative to the Protection of civilian Persons
in tiMe of War of 12 auGust 1949
The undersigned Plenipotentiaries of the Governments represented at the Diplomatic
Conference held at Geneva from April 21 to August 12, 1949, for the purpose of establishing
a Convention for the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, have agreed as follows:
PART I
General Provisions
Article 1
The High Contracting Parties undertake to respect and to ensure respect for Respect
the present Convention in all circumstances. for the
Convention1
Article 2
In addition to the provisions which shall be implemented in peacetime, the Application
present Convention shall apply to all cases of declared war or of any other of the
armed conflict which may arise between two or more of the High Contract- Convention
ing Parties, even if the state of war is not recognized by one of them.
The Convention shall also apply to all cases of partial or total occupation of
the territory of a High Contracting Party, even if the said occupation meets
with no armed resistance.
Although one of the Powers in conflict may not be a party to the present
Convention, the Powers who are parties thereto shall remain bound by it in
their mutual relations. They shall furthermore be bound by the Convention
in relation to the said Power, if the latter accepts and applies the provisions
thereof.
Article 3
In the case of armed conflict not of an international character occurring in Conflicts
the territory of one of the High Contracting Parties, each Party to the conflict not of an
shall be bound to apply, as a minimum, the following provisions: international
character
1) Persons taking no active part in the hostilities, including members of
armed forces who have laid down their arms and those placed hors de
combat by sickness, wounds, detention, or any other cause, shall in all
circumstances be treated humanely, without any adverse distinction
1 The marginal notes or titles of articles have been drafted by the Swiss Federal Department of
Foreign Affairs.

[Source edition page 156]

152 FOURTH CONVENTION
founded on race, colour, religion or faith, sex, birth or wealth, or any
other similar criteria.
To this end, the following acts are and shall remain prohibited at any time
and in any place whatsoever with respect to the above-mentioned persons:
a) violence to life and person, in particular murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture;
b) taking of hostages;
c) outrages upon personal dignity, in particular humiliating and degrading treatment;
d) the passing of sentences and the carrying out of executions without
previous judgment pronounced by a regularly constituted court, affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples.
2) The wounded and sick shall be collected and cared for.
An impartial humanitarian body, such as the International Committee
of the Red Cross, may offer its services to the Parties to the conflict.
The Parties to the conflict should further endeavour to bring into force,
by means of special agreements, all or part of the other provisions of the
present Convention.
The application of the preceding provisions shall not affect the legal status of the Parties to the conflict.
Article 4
Definition Persons protected by the Convention are those who at a given moment and in
of protected any manner whatsoever, find themselves, in case of a conflict or occupation,
persons in the hands of persons a Party to the conflict or Occupying Power of which
they are not nationals.
Nationals of a State which is not bound by the Convention are not protected
by it. Nationals of a neutral State who find themselves in the territory of a
belligerent State, and nationals of a co-belligerent State, shall not be regarded
as protected persons while the State of which they are nationals has normal
diplomatic representation in the State in whose hands they are.
The provisions of Part II are, however, wider in application, as defined in
Article 13.
Persons protected by the Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the
Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of August
12, 1949, or by the Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition
of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea of
August 12, 1949, or by the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of

[Source edition page 157]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 153
Prisoners of War of August 12, 1949, shall not be considered as protected
persons within the meaning of the present Convention.
Article 5
Where, in the territory of a Party to the conflict, the latter is satisfied that an Derogations
individual protected person is definitely suspected of or engaged in activities
hostile to the security of the State, such individual person shall not be entitled
to claim such rights and privileges under the present Convention as would, if
exercised in the favour of such individual person, be prejudicial to the security of such State.
Where in occupied territory an individual protected person is detained as a
spy or saboteur, or as a person under definite suspicion of activity hostile to
the security of the Occupying Power, such person shall, in those cases where
absolute military security so requires, be regarded as having forfeited rights
of communication under the present Convention.
In each case, such persons shall nevertheless be treated with humanity, and in
case of trial, shall not be deprived of the rights of fair and regular trial prescribed
by the present Convention. They shall also be granted the full rights and privileges of a protected person under the present Convention at the earliest date
consistent with the security of the State or Occupying Power, as the case may be.
Article 6
The present Convention shall apply from the outset of any conflict or occupation mentioned in Article 2. Beginning
In the territory of Parties to the conflict, the application of the present and end of
Convention shall cease on the general close of military operations. application
In the case of occupied territory, the application of the present Convention
shall cease one year after the general close of military operations; however,
the Occupying Power shall be bound, for the duration of the occupation, to
the extent that such Power exercises the functions of government in such territory, by the provisions of the following Articles of the present Convention:
1 to 12, 27, 29 to 34, 47, 49, 51, 52, 53, 59, 61 to 77, 143.
Protected persons whose release, repatriation or re-establishment may take place
after such dates shall meanwhile continue to benefit by the present Convention.
Article 7
In addition to the agreements expressly provided for in Articles 11, 14, 15, 17,
36, 108, 109, 132, 133 and 149, the High Contracting Parties may conclude Special
other special agreements for all matters concerning which they may deem it agreements
suitable to make separate provision. No special agreement shall adversely af-

[Source edition page 158]

154 FOURTH CONVENTION
fect the situation of protected persons, as defined by the present Convention,
nor restrict the rights which it confers upon them.
Protected persons shall continue to have the benefit of such agreements as
long as the Convention is applicable to them, except where express provisions
to the contrary are contained in the aforesaid or in subsequent agreements, or
where more favourable measures have been taken with regard to them by one
or other of the Parties to the conflict.
Article 8
Non-renun- Protected persons may in no circumstances renounce in part or in entirety
ciation of the rights secured to them by the present Convention, and by the special
rights agreements referred to in the foregoing Article, if such there be.
Article 9
Protecting The present Convention shall be applied with the co-operation and under the
Powers scrutiny of the Protecting Powers whose duty it is to safeguard the interests
of the Parties to the conflict. For this purpose, the Protecting Powers may appoint, apart from their diplomatic or consular staff, delegates from amongst
their own nationals or the nationals of other neutral Powers. The said delegates shall be subject to the approval of the Power with which they are to
carry out their duties.
The Parties to the conflict shall facilitate to the greatest extent possible the
task of the representatives or delegates of the Protecting Powers.
The representatives or delegates of the Protecting Powers shall not in any case
exceed their mission under the present Convention. They shall, in particular,
take account of the imperative necessities of security of the State wherein they
carry out their duties.
Article 10
Activities of The provisions of the present Convention constitute no obstacle to the huthe Interna- manitarian activities which the International Committee of the Red Cross or
tional Com- any other impartial humanitarian organization may, subject to the consent of
mittee of the the Parties to the conflict concerned, undertake for the protection of civilian
Red Cross persons and for their relief.
Article 11
Substitutes The High Contracting Parties may at any time agree to entrust to an internafor Protect- tional organization which offers all guarantees of impartiality and efficacy the
ing Powers duties incumbent on the Protecting Powers by virtue of the present Convention.
When persons protected by the present Convention do not benefit or cease
to benefit, no matter for what reason, by the activities of a Protecting Power

[Source edition page 159]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 155
or of an organization provided for in the first paragraph above, the Detaining
Power shall request a neutral State, or such an organization, to undertake the
functions performed under the present Convention by a Protecting Power
designated by the Parties to a conflict.
If protection cannot be arranged accordingly, the Detaining Power shall request or shall accept, subject to the provisions of this Article, the offer of the
services of a humanitarian organization, such as the International Committee
of the Red Cross, to assume the humanitarian functions performed by
Protecting Powers under the present Convention.
Any neutral Power or any organization invited by the Power concerned or
offering itself for these purposes, shall be required to act with a sense of responsibility towards the Party to the conflict on which persons protected by
the present Convention depend, and shall be required to furnish sufficient
assurances that it is in a position to undertake the appropriate functions and
to discharge them impartially.
No derogation from the preceding provisions shall be made by special agreements between Powers one of which is restricted, even temporarily, in its
freedom to negotiate with the other Power or its allies by reason of military
events, more particularly where the whole, or a substantial part, of the territory of the said Power is occupied.
Whenever in the present Convention mention is made of a Protecting Power,
such mention applies to substitute organizations in the sense of the present
Article.
The provisions of this Article shall extend and be adapted to cases of nationals
of a neutral State who are in occupied territory or who find themselves in the
territory of a belligerent State in which the State of which they are nationals
has not normal diplomatic representation.
Article 12
In cases where they deem it advisable in the interest of protected persons, Conciliation
particularly in cases of disagreement between the Parties to the conflict as to procedure
the application or interpretation of the provisions of the present Convention,
the Protecting Powers shall lend their good offices with a view to settling the
disagreement.
For this purpose, each of the Protecting Powers may, either at the invitation
of one Party or on its own initiative, propose to the Parties to the conflict a
meeting of their representatives, and in particular of the authorities responsible for protected persons, possibly on neutral territory suitably chosen. The
Parties to the conflict shall be bound to give effect to the proposals made to
them for this purpose. The Protecting Powers may, if necessary, propose for
approval by the Parties to the conflict, a person belonging to a neutral Power

[Source edition page 160]

156 FOURTH CONVENTION
or delegated by the International Committee of the Red Cross, who shall be
invited to take part in such a meeting.
PART II
General Protection of PoPulations
aGainst certain conseQuences of War
Article 13
Field of The provisions of Part II cover the whole of the populations of the countries
application in conflict, without any adverse distinction based, in particular, on race, naof Part II tionality, religion or political opinion, and are intended to alleviate the sufferings caused by war.
Article 14
Hospital and In time of peace, the High Contracting Parties and, after the outbreak of hossafety zones tilities, the Parties thereto, may establish in their own territory and, if the need
and localities arises, in occupied areas, hospital and safety zones and localities so organized
as to protect from the effects of war, wounded, sick and aged persons, children under fifteen, expectant mothers and mothers of children under seven.
Upon the outbreak and during the course of hostilities, the Parties concerned
may conclude agreements on mutual recognition of the zones and localities
they have created. They may for this purpose implement the provisions of the
Draft Agreement annexed to the present Convention, with such amendments
as they may consider necessary.
The Protecting Powers and the International Committee of the Red Cross
are invited to lend their good offices in order to facilitate the institution and
recognition of these hospital and safety zones and localities.
Article 15
Neutralized Any Party to the conflict may, either direct or through a neutral State or some
zones humanitarian organization, propose to the adverse Party to establish, in the
regions where fighting is taking place, neutralized zones intended to shelter
from the effects of war the following persons, without distinction:
a) wounded and sick combatants or non-combatants;
b) civilian persons who take no part in hostilities, and who, while they
reside in the zones, perform no work of a military character.
When the Parties concerned have agreed upon the geographical position, administration, food supply and supervision of the proposed neutralized zone,
a written agreement shall be concluded and signed by the representatives of
the Parties to the conflict. The agreement shall fix the beginning and the duration of the neutralization of the zone.

[Source edition page 161]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 157
Article 16
The wounded and sick, as well as the infirm, and expectant mothers, shall be Wounded
the object of particular protection and respect. and sick
I. General
As far as military considerations allow, each Party to the conflict shall faprotection
cilitate the steps taken to search for the killed and wounded, to assist the
shipwrecked and other persons exposed to grave danger, and to protect them
against pillage and ill-treatment.
Article 17
The Parties to the conflict shall endeavour to conclude local agreements for the II. Evacuation
removal from besieged or encircled areas, of wounded, sick, infirm, and aged
persons, children and maternity cases, and for the passage of ministers of all religions, medical personnel and medical equipment on their way to such areas.
Article 18
Civilian hospitals organized to give care to the wounded and sick, the infirm III. Protection
and maternity cases, may in no circumstances be the object of attack, but shall of hospitals
at all times be respected and protected by the Parties to the conflict.
States which are Parties to a conflict shall provide all civilian hospitals with
certificates showing that they are civilian hospitals and that the buildings
which they occupy are not used for any purpose which would deprive these
hospitals of protection in accordance with Article 19.
Civilian hospitals shall be marked by means of the emblem provided for in
Article 38 of the Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of
the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of August 12, 1949, but
only if so authorized by the State.
The Parties to the conflict shall, in so far as military considerations permit,
take the necessary steps to make the distinctive emblems indicating civilian
hospitals clearly visible to the enemy land, air and naval forces in order to
obviate the possibility of any hostile action.
In view of the dangers to which hospitals may be exposed by being close to
military objectives, it is recommended that such hospitals be situated as far as
possible from such objectives.
Article 19
The protection to which civilian hospitals are entitled shall not cease unless IV. Disconthey are used to commit, outside their humanitarian duties, acts harmful to tinuance of
the enemy. Protection may, however, cease only after due warning has been protection
given, naming, in all appropriate cases, a reasonable time limit, and after such of hospitals
warning has remained unheeded.

[Source edition page 162]

158 FOURTH CONVENTION
The fact that sick or wounded members of the armed forces are nursed in
these hospitals, or the presence of small arms and ammunition taken from
such combatants and not yet handed to the proper service, shall not be considered to be acts harmful to the enemy.
Article 20
V. Hospital Persons regularly and solely engaged in the operation and administration of
staff civilian hospitals, including the personnel engaged in the search for, removal
and transporting of and caring for wounded and sick civilians, the infirm and
maternity cases, shall be respected and protected.
In occupied territory and in zones of military operations, the above personnel shall be recognizable by means of an identity card certifying their status,
bearing the photograph of the holder and embossed with the stamp of the
responsible authority, and also by means of a stamped, water-resistant armlet
which they shall wear on the left arm while carrying out their duties. This
armlet shall be issued by the State and shall bear the emblem provided for in
Article 38 of the Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition
of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of August 12, 1949.
Other personnel who are engaged in the operation and administration of civilian hospitals shall be entitled to respect and protection and to wear the
armlet, as provided in and under the conditions prescribed in this Article,
while they are employed on such duties. The identity card shall state the duties on which they are employed.
The management of each hospital shall at all times hold at the disposal of the
competent national or occupying authorities an up-to-date list of such personnel.
Article 21
VI. Land and Convoys of vehicles or hospital trains on land or specially provided vessels on
sea transport sea, conveying wounded and sick civilians, the infirm and maternity cases,
shall be respected and protected in the same manner as the hospitals provided for in Article 18, and shall be marked, with the consent of the State, by
the display of the distinctive emblem provided for in Article 38 of the Geneva
Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick
in Armed Forces in the Field of August 12, 1949.
Article 22
VII. Air Aircraft exclusively employed for the removal of wounded and sick civilians,
transport the infirm and maternity cases, or for the transport of medical personnel
and equipment, shall not be attacked, but shall be respected while flying at
heights, times and on routes specifically agreed upon between all the Parties
to the conflict concerned.

[Source edition page 163]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 159
They may be marked with the distinctive emblem provided for in Article 38 of the Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the
Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of August 12, 1949.
Unless agreed otherwise, flights over enemy or enemy-occupied territory are
prohibited.
Such aircraft shall obey every summons to land. In the event of a landing thus
imposed, the aircraft with its occupants may continue its flight after examination, if any.
Article 23
Each High Contracting Party shall allow the free passage of all consignments Consignof medical and hospital stores and objects necessary for religious worship in- ments of
tended only for civilians of another High Contracting Party, even if the latter medical
is its adversary. It shall likewise permit the free passage of all consignments of supplies,
essential foodstuffs, clothing and tonics intended for children under fifteen, food and
expectant mothers and maternity cases. clothing
The obligation of a High Contracting Party to allow the free passage of the
consignments indicated in the preceding paragraph is subject to the condition that this Party is satisfied that there are no serious reasons for fearing:
a) that the consignments may be diverted from their destination,
b) that the control may not be effective, or
c) that a definite advantage may accrue to the military efforts or economy
of the enemy through the substitution of the above-mentioned consignments for goods which would otherwise be provided or produced
by the enemy or through the release of such material, services or facilities as would otherwise be required for the production of such goods.
The Power which allows the passage of the consignments indicated in the
first paragraph of this Article may make such permission conditional on the
distribution to the persons benefited thereby being made under the local supervision of the Protecting Powers.
Such consignments shall be forwarded as rapidly as possible, and the Power
which permits their free passage shall have the right to prescribe the technical
arrangements under which such passage is allowed.
Article 24
The Parties to the conflict shall take the necessary measures to ensure that Measures
children under fifteen, who are orphaned or are separated from their fami- relating to
lies as a result of the war, are not left to their own resources, and that their child welfare
maintenance, the exercise of their religion and their education are facilitated
in all circumstances. Their education shall, as far as possible, be entrusted to
persons of a similar cultural tradition.

[Source edition page 164]

160 FOURTH CONVENTION
The Parties to the conflict shall facilitate the reception of such children in a
neutral country for the duration of the conflict with the consent of the Protecting Power, if any, and under due safeguards for the observance of the
principles stated in the first paragraph.
They shall, furthermore, endeavour to arrange for all children under twelve to
be identified by the wearing of identity discs, or by some other means.
Article 25
Family news All persons in the territory of a Party to the conflict, or in a territory occupied
by it, shall be enabled to give news of a strictly personal nature to members
of their families, wherever they may be, and to receive news from them. This
correspondence shall be forwarded speedily and without undue delay.
If, as a result of circumstances, it becomes difficult or impossible to exchange
family correspondence by the ordinary post, the Parties to the conflict concerned shall apply to a neutral intermediary, such as the Central Agency
provided for in Article 140, and shall decide in consultation with it how to
ensure the fulfilment of their obligations under the best possible conditions,
in particular with the co-operation of the National Red Cross (Red Crescent,
Red Lion and Sun) Societies.
If the Parties to the conflict deem it necessary to restrict family correspondence, such restrictions shall be confined to the compulsory use of standard
forms containing twenty-five freely chosen words, and to the limitation of the
number of these forms despatched to one each month.
Article 26
Dispersed Each Party to the conflict shall facilitate enquiries made by members of famifamilies lies dispersed owing to the war, with the object of renewing contact with one
another and of meeting, if possible. It shall encourage, in particular, the work
of organizations engaged on this task provided they are acceptable to it and
conform to its security regulations.

[Source edition page 165]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 161
PART III
status and treatMent of Protected Persons
SECTION I
Provisions common to the territories of the parties
to the conflict and to occupied territories
Article 27
Protected persons are entitled, in all circumstances, to respect for their per- Treatment
sons, their honour, their family rights, their religious convictions and prac- I. General
tices, and their manners and customs. They shall at all times be humanely observations
treated, and shall be protected especially against all acts of violence or threats
thereof and against insults and public curiosity.
Women shall be especially protected against any attack on their honour, in
particular against rape, enforced prostitution, or any form of indecent assault.
Without prejudice to the provisions relating to their state of health, age and
sex, all protected persons shall be treated with the same consideration by the
Party to the conflict in whose power they are, without any adverse distinction
based, in particular, on race, religion or political opinion.
However, the Parties to the conflict may take such measures of control and security in regard to protected persons as may be necessary as a result of the war.
Article 28
The presence of a protected person may not be used to render certain points II. Danger
or areas immune from military operations. zones
Article 29
The Party to the conflict in whose hands protected persons may be, is re- III. Responsisponsible for the treatment accorded to them by its agents, irrespective of any bilities
individual responsibility which may be incurred.
Article 30
Protected persons shall have every facility for making application to the Pro- Application
tecting Powers, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the National to Protecting
Red Cross (Red Crescent, Red Lion and Sun) Society of the country where Powers and
they may be, as well as to any organization that might assist them. relief organizations
These several organizations shall be granted all facilities for that purpose by
the authorities, within the bounds set by military or security considerations.
Apart from the visits of the delegates of the Protecting Powers and of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, provided for by Article 143, the
Detaining or Occupying Powers shall facilitate as much as possible visits to

[Source edition page 166]

162 FOURTH CONVENTION
protected persons by the representatives of other organizations whose object
is to give spiritual aid or material relief to such persons.
Article 31
Prohibition No physical or moral coercion shall be exercised against protected persons, in
of coercion particular to obtain information from them or from third parties.
Article 32
Prohibition The High Contracting Parties specifically agree that each of them is prohibof corporal ited from taking any measure of such a character as to cause the physical
punishment, suffering or extermination of protected persons in their hands. This prohibitorture, etc. tion applies not only to murder, torture, corporal punishment, mutilation and
medical or scientific experiments not necessitated by the medical treatment
of a protected person, but also to any other measures of brutality whether applied by civilian or military agents.
Article 33
Individual No protected person may be punished for an offence he or she has not perresponsibil- sonally committed. Collective penalties and likewise all measures of intimiity, collective dation or of terrorism are prohibited.
penalties, Pillage is prohibited.
pillage, Reprisals against protected persons and their property are prohibited.
reprisals
Article 34
Hostages The taking of hostages is prohibited.
SECTION II
aliens in the territory of a party to the conflict
Article 35
Right to All protected persons who may desire to leave the territory at the outset of, or
leave the during a conflict, shall be entitled to do so, unless their departure is contrary
territory to the national interests of the State. The applications of such persons to leave
shall be decided in accordance with regularly established procedures and the
decision shall be taken as rapidly as possible. Those persons permitted to leave
may provide themselves with the necessary funds for their journey and take
with them a reasonable amount of their effects and articles of personal use.
If any such person is refused permission to leave the territory, he shall be entitled
to have such refusal reconsidered as soon as possible by an appropriate court or
administrative board designated by the Detaining Power for that purpose.

[Source edition page 167]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 163
Upon request, representatives of the Protecting Power shall, unless reasons
of security prevent it, or the persons concerned object, be furnished with the
reasons for refusal of any request for permission to leave the territory and be
given, as expeditiously as possible, the names of all persons who have been
denied permission to leave.
Article 36
Departures permitted under the foregoing Article shall be carried out in sat- Method of
isfactory conditions as regards safety, hygiene, sanitation and food. All costs repatriation
in connection therewith, from the point of exit in the territory of the Detaining Power, shall be borne by the country of destination, or, in the case of
accommodation in a neutral country, by the Power whose nationals are benefited. The practical details of such movements may, if necessary, be settled by
special agreements between the Powers concerned.
The foregoing shall not prejudice such special agreements as may be concluded between Parties to the conflict concerning the exchange and repatriation
of their nationals in enemy hands.
Article 37
Protected persons who are confined pending proceedings or serving a sentence Persons in
involving loss of liberty, shall during their confinement be humanely treated. confinement
As soon as they are released, they may ask to leave the territory in conformity
with the foregoing Articles.
Article 38
With the exception of special measures authorized by the present Convention, Nonin particular by Articles 27 and 41 thereof, the situation of protected persons repatriated
shall continue to be regulated, in principle, by the provisions concerning al- persons
iens in time of peace. In any case, the following rights shall be granted to them: I. General
observations
1) They shall be enabled to receive the individual or collective relief that
may be sent to them.
2) They shall, if their state of health so requires, receive medical attention
and hospital treatment to the same extent as the nationals of the State
concerned.
3) They shall be allowed to practise their religion and to receive spiritual
assistance from ministers of their faith.
4) If they reside in an area particularly exposed to the dangers of war, they
shall be authorized to move from that area to the same extent as the nationals of the State concerned.

[Source edition page 168]

164 FOURTH CONVENTION
5) Children under fifteen years, pregnant women and mothers of children
under seven years shall benefit by any preferential treatment to the same
extent as the nationals of the State concerned.
Article 39
II. Means of Protected persons who, as a result of the war, have lost their gainful employexistence ment, shall be granted the opportunity to find paid employment. That opportunity shall, subject to security considerations and to the provisions of
Article 40, be equal to that enjoyed by the nationals of the Power in whose
territory they are.
Where a Party to the conflict applies to a protected person methods of control
which result in his being unable to support himself, and especially if such a
person is prevented for reasons of security from finding paid employment on
reasonable conditions, the said Party shall ensure his support and that of his
dependents.
Protected persons may in any case receive allowances from their home country, the Protecting Power, or the relief societies referred to in Article 30.
Article 40
III. Protected persons may be compelled to work only to the same extent as na-
Employment tionals of the Party to the conflict in whose territory they are.
If protected persons are of enemy nationality, they may only be compelled to
do work which is normally necessary to ensure the feeding, sheltering, clothing, transport and health of human beings and which is not directly related to
the conduct of military operations.
In the cases mentioned in the two preceding paragraphs, protected persons
compelled to work shall have the benefit of the same working conditions and
of the same safeguards as national workers, in particular as regards wages,
hours of labour, clothing and equipment, previous training and compensation for occupational accidents and diseases.
If the above provisions are infringed, protected persons shall be allowed to
exercise their right of complaint in accordance with Article 30.
Article 41
IV. Assigned Should the Power in whose hands protected persons may be consider the
residence. measures of control mentioned in the present Convention to be inadequate,
Internment it may not have recourse to any other measure of control more severe than
that of assigned residence or internment, in accordance with the provisions
of Articles 42 and 43.

[Source edition page 169]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 165
In applying the provisions of Article 39, second paragraph, to the cases of persons required to leave their usual places of residence by virtue of a decision
placing them in assigned residence elsewhere, the Detaining Power shall be
guided as closely as possible by the standards of welfare set forth in Part III,
Section IV of this Convention.
Article 42
The internment or placing in assigned residence of protected persons may be V. Grounds for
ordered only if the security of the Detaining Power makes it absolutely necessary. internment
or assigned
If any person, acting through the representatives of the Protecting Power, volresidence.
untarily demands internment, and if his situation renders this step necessary,
Voluntary
he shall be interned by the Power in whose hands he may be.
internment
Article 43
Any protected person who has been interned or placed in assigned residence VI. Procedure
shall be entitled to have such action reconsidered as soon as possible by an
appropriate court or administrative board designated by the Detaining Power
for that purpose. If the internment or placing in assigned residence is maintained, the court or administrative board shall periodically, and at least twice
yearly, give consideration to his or her case, with a view to the favourable
amendment of the initial decision, if circumstances permit.
Unless the protected persons concerned object, the Detaining Power shall,
as rapidly as possible, give the Protecting Power the names of any protected
persons who have been interned or subjected to assigned residence, or who
have been released from internment or assigned residence. The decisions of
the courts or boards mentioned in the first paragraph of the present Article
shall also, subject to the same conditions, be notified as rapidly as possible to
the Protecting Power.
Article 44
In applying the measures of control mentioned in the present Convention, VII. Refugees
the Detaining Power shall not treat as enemy aliens exclusively on the basis of
their nationality de jure of an enemy State, refugees who do not, in fact, enjoy
the protection of any government.
Article 45
Protected persons shall not be transferred to a Power which is not a party to VIII. Transfer
the Convention. to another
Power
This provision shall in no way constitute an obstacle to the repatriation of
protected persons, or to their return to their country of residence after the
cessation of hostilities.

[Source edition page 170]

166 FOURTH CONVENTION
Protected persons may be transferred by the Detaining Power only to a Power
which is a party to the present Convention and after the Detaining Power has
satisfied itself of the willingness and ability of such transferee Power to apply the present Convention. If protected persons are transferred under such
circumstances, responsibility for the application of the present Convention
rests on the Power accepting them, while they are in its custody. Nevertheless,
if that Power falls to carry out the provisions of the present Convention in
any important respect, the Power by which the protected persons were transferred shall, upon being so notified by the Protecting Power, take effective
measures to correct the situation or shall request the return of the protected
persons. Such request must be complied with.
In no circumstances shall a protected person be transferred to a country
where he or she may have reason to fear persecution for his or her political
opinions or religious beliefs.
The provisions of this Article do not constitute an obstacle to the extradition,
in pursuance of extradition treaties concluded before the outbreak of hostilities, of protected persons accused of offences against ordinary criminal law.
Article 46
Cancellation In so far as they have not been previously withdrawn, restrictive measures
of restrictive taken regarding protected persons shall be cancelled as soon as possible after
measures the close of hostilities.
Restrictive measures affecting their property shall be cancelled, in accordance
with the law of the Detaining Power, as soon as possible after the close of
hostilities.
SECTION III
occupied territories
Article 47
Inviolability Protected persons who are in occupied territory shall not be deprived, in any
of rights case or in any manner whatsoever, of the benefits of the present Convention
by any change introduced, as the result of the occupation of a territory, into
the institutions or government of the said territory, nor by any agreement
concluded between the authorities of the occupied territories and the Occupying Power, nor by any annexation by the latter of the whole or part of the
occupied territory.

[Source edition page 171]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 167
Article 48
Protected persons who are not nationals of the Power whose territory is oc- Special cases
cupied, may avail themselves of the right to leave the territory subject to the of
provisions of Article 35, and decisions thereon shall be taken according to the repatriation
procedure which the Occupying Power shall establish in accordance with the
said Article.
Article 49
Individual or mass forcible transfers, as well as deportations of protected per- Deportations,
sons from occupied territory to the territory of the Occupying Power or to that transfers,
of any other country, occupied or not, are prohibited, regardless of their motive. evacuations
Nevertheless, the Occupying Power may undertake total or partial evacuation of a given area if the security of the population or imperative military
reasons so demand. Such evacuations may not involve the displacement of
protected persons outside the bounds of the occupied territory except when
for material reasons it is impossible to avoid such displacement. Persons thus
evacuated shall be transferred back to their homes as soon as hostilities in the
area in question have ceased.
The Occupying Power undertaking such transfers or evacuations shall ensure,
to the greatest practicable extent, that proper accommodation is provided to
receive the protected persons, that the removals are effected in satisfactory
conditions of hygiene, health, safety and nutrition, and that members of the
same family are not separated.
The Protecting Power shall be informed of any transfers and evacuations as
soon as they have taken place.
The Occupying Power shall not detain protected persons in an area particularly exposed to the dangers of war unless the security of the population or
imperative military reasons so demand.
The Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its own civilian
population into the territory it occupies.
Article 50
The Occupying Power shall, with the co-operation of the national and local Children
authorities, facilitate the proper working of all institutions devoted to the care
and education of children.
The Occupying Power shall take all necessary steps to facilitate the identification of children and the registration of their parentage. It may not, in any case,
change their personal status, nor enlist them in formations or organizations
subordinate to it.

[Source edition page 172]

168 FOURTH CONVENTION
Should the local institutions be inadequate for the purpose, the Occupying
Power shall make arrangements for the maintenance and education, if possible by persons of their own nationality, language and religion, of children
who are orphaned or separated from their parents as a result of the war and
who cannot be adequately cared for by a near relative or friend.
A special section of the Bureau set up in accordance with Article 136 shall be
responsible for taking all necessary steps to identify children whose identity
is in doubt. Particulars of their parents or other near relatives should always
be recorded if available.
The Occupying Power shall not hinder the application of any preferential
measures in regard to food, medical care and protection against the effects of
war, which may have been adopted prior to the occupation in favour of children under fifteen years, expectant mothers, and mothers of children under
seven years.
Article 51
Enlistment. The Occupying Power may not compel protected persons to serve in its
Labour armed or auxiliary forces. No pressure or propaganda which aims at securing
voluntary enlistment is permitted.
The Occupying Power may not compel protected persons to work unless they
are over eighteen years of age, and then only on work which is necessary
either for the needs of the army of occupation, or for the public utility services, or for the feeding, sheltering, clothing, transportation or health of the
population of the occupied country. Protected persons may not be compelled
to undertake any work which would involve them in the obligation of taking
part in military operations. The Occupying Power may not compel protected
persons to employ forcible means to ensure the security of the installations
where they are performing compulsory labour.
The work shall be carried out only in the occupied territory where the persons whose services have been requisitioned are. Every such person shall, so
far as possible, be kept in his usual place of employment. Workers shall be
paid a fair wage and the work shall be proportionate to their physical and intellectual capacities. The legislation in force in the occupied country concerning working conditions, and safeguards as regards, in particular, such matters
as wages, hours of work, equipment, preliminary training and compensation
for occupational accidents and diseases, shall be applicable to the protected
persons assigned to the work referred to in this Article.
In no case shall requisition of labour lead to a mobilization of workers in an
organization of a military or semi-military character.

[Source edition page 173]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 169
Article 52
No contract, agreement or regulation shall impair the right of any worker, Protection
whether voluntary or not and wherever he may be, to apply to the representa- of workers
tives of the Protecting Power in order to request the said Power’s intervention.
All measures aiming at creating unemployment or at restricting the opportunities offered to workers in an occupied territory, in order to induce them to
work for the Occupying Power, are prohibited.
Article 53
Any destruction by the Occupying Power of real or personal property belong- Prohibited
ing individually or collectively to private persons, or to the State, or to other destruction
public authorities, or to social or co-operative organizations, is prohibited,
except where such destruction is rendered absolutely necessary by military
operations.
Article 54
The Occupying Power may not alter the status of public officials or judges in Judges
the occupied territories, or in any way apply sanctions to or take any meas- and public
ures of coercion or discrimination against them, should they abstain from officials
fulfilling their functions for reasons of conscience.
This prohibition does not prejudice the application of the second paragraph
of Article 51. It does not affect the right of the Occupying Power to remove
public officials from their posts.
Article 55
To the fullest extent of the means available to it, the Occupying Power has the Food and
duty of ensuring the food and medical supplies of the population; it should, in medical
particular, bring in the necessary foodstuffs, medical stores and other articles supplies
if the resources of the occupied territory are inadequate. for the
population
The Occupying Power may not requisition foodstuffs, articles or medical
supplies available in the occupied territory, except for use by the occupation
forces and administration personnel, and then only if the requirements of the
civilian population have been taken into account. Subject to the provisions of
other international Conventions, the Occupying Power shall make arrangements to ensure that fair value is paid for any requisitioned goods.
The Protecting Power shall, at any time, be at liberty to verify the state of the
food and medical supplies in occupied territories, except where temporary
restrictions are made necessary by imperative military requirements.

[Source edition page 174]

170 FOURTH CONVENTION
Article 56
Hygiene and To the fullest extent of the means available to it, the Occupying Power has
public health the duty of ensuring and maintaining, with the co-operation of national and
local authorities, the medical and hospital establishments and services, public
health and hygiene in the occupied territory, with particular reference to the
adoption and application of the prophylactic and preventive measures necessary to combat the spread of contagious diseases and epidemics. Medical
personnel of all categories shall be allowed to carry out their duties.
If new hospitals are set up in occupied territory and if the competent organs
of the occupied State are not operating there, the occupying authorities shall,
if necessary, grant them the recognition provided for in Article 18. In similar
circumstances, the occupying authorities shall also grant recognition to hospital personnel and transport vehicles under the provisions of Articles 20 and 21.
In adopting measures of health and hygiene and in their implementation, the
Occupying Power shall take into consideration the moral and ethical susceptibilities of the population of the occupied territory.
Article 57
Requisition The Occupying Power may requisition civilian hospitals only temporarily and
of hospitals only in cases of urgent necessity for the care of military wounded and sick,
and then on condition that suitable arrangements are made in due time for
the care and treatment of the patients and for the needs of the civilian population for hospital accommodation.
The material and stores of civilian hospitals cannot be requisitioned so long as
they are necessary for the needs of the civilian population.
Article 58
Spiritual The Occupying Power shall permit ministers of religion to give spiritual asassistance sistance to the members of their religious communities.
The Occupying Power shall also accept consignments of books and articles
required for religious needs and shall facilitate their distribution in occupied
territory.
Article 59
Relief If the whole or part of the population of an occupied territory is inadequately
I. Collective supplied, the Occupying Power shall agree to relief schemes on behalf of the
relief said population, and shall facilitate them by all the means at its disposal.
Such schemes, which may be undertaken either by States or by impartial humanitarian organizations such as the International Committee of the Red
Cross, shall consist, in particular, of the provision of consignments of foodstuffs, medical supplies and clothing.

[Source edition page 175]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 171
All Contracting Parties shall permit the free passage of these consignments
and shall guarantee their protection.
A Power granting free passage to consignments on their way to territory occupied by an adverse Party to the conflict shall, however, have the right to
search the consignments, to regulate their passage according to prescribed
times and routes, and to be reasonably satisfied through the Protecting Power
that these consignments are to be used for the relief of the needy population
and are not to be used for the benefit of the Occupying Power.
Article 60
Relief consignments shall in no way relieve the Occupying Power of any of its II. Responsiresponsibilities under Articles 55, 56 and 59. The Occupying Power shall in no bilities of the
way whatsoever divert relief consignments from the purpose for which they Occupying
are intended, except in cases of urgent necessity, in the interests of the popula- Power
tion of the occupied territory and with the consent of the Protecting Power.
Article 61
The distribution of the relief consignments referred to in the foregoing Arti- III.
cles shall be carried out with the co-operation and under the supervision of Distribution
the Protecting Power. This duty may also be delegated, by agreement between
the Occupying Power and the Protecting Power, to a neutral Power, to the
International Committee of the Red Cross or to any other impartial humanitarian body.
Such consignments shall be exempt in occupied territory from all charges,
taxes or customs duties unless these are necessary in the interests of the economy of the territory. The Occupying Power shall facilitate the rapid distribution of these consignments.
All Contracting Parties shall endeavour to permit the transit and transport,
free of charge, of such relief consignments on their way to occupied territories.
Article 62
Subject to imperative reasons of security, protected persons in occupied ter- IV. Individual
ritories shall be permitted to receive the individual relief consignments sent relief
to them.
Article 63
Subject to temporary and exceptional measures imposed for urgent reasons National Red
of security by the Occupying Power: Cross and
a) recognized National Red Cross (Red Crescent, Red Lion and Sun) other relief
Societies shall be able to pursue their activities in accordance with societies
Red Cross Principles, as defined by the International Red Cross Con-

[Source edition page 176]

172 FOURTH CONVENTION
ferences. Other relief societies shall be permitted to continue their
humanitarian activities under similar conditions;
b) the Occupying Power may not require any changes in the personnel
or structure of these societies, which would prejudice the aforesaid
activities.
The same principles shall apply to the activities and personnel of special organizations of a non-military character, which already exist or which may be
established, for the purpose of ensuring the living conditions of the civilian
population by the maintenance of the essential public utility services, by the
distribution of relief and by the organization of rescues.
Article 64
Penal The penal laws of the occupied territory shall remain in force, with the exceplegislation tion that they may be repealed or suspended by the Occupying Power in cases
I. General where they constitute a threat to its security or an obstacle to the application
observations of the present Convention. Subject to the latter consideration and to the necessity for ensuring the effective administration of justice, the tribunals of the
occupied territory shall continue to function in respect of all offences covered
by the said laws.
The Occupying Power may, however, subject the population of the occupied
territory to provisions which are essential to enable the Occupying Power to
fulfil its obligations under the present Convention, to maintain the orderly government of the territory, and to ensure the security of the Occupying Power,
of the members and property of the occupying forces or administration, and
likewise of the establishments and lines of communication used by them.
Article 65
II. Publication The penal provisions enacted by the Occupying Power shall not come into
force before they have been published and brought to the knowledge of the
inhabitants in their own language. The effect of these penal provisions shall
not be retroactive.
Article 66
III. Compe- In case of a breach of the penal provisions promulgated by it by virtue of the
tent courts second paragraph of Article 64, the Occupying Power may hand over the accused to its properly constituted, non-political military courts, on condition
that the said courts sit in the occupied country. Courts of appeal shall preferably sit in the occupied country.
Article 67
IV. Applicable The courts shall apply only those provisions of law which were applicable
provisions prior to the offence, and which are in accordance with general principles of

[Source edition page 177]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 173
law, in particular the principle that the penalty shall be proportionate to the
offence. They shall take into consideration the fact that the accused is not a
national of the Occupying Power.
Article 68
Protected persons who commit an offence which is solely intended to harm V. Penalties.
the Occupying Power, but which does not constitute an attempt on the life or Death
limb of members of the occupying forces or administration, nor a grave col- penalty
lective danger, nor seriously damage the property of the occupying forces or
administration or the installations used by them, shall be liable to internment
or simple imprisonment, provided the duration of such internment or imprisonment is proportionate to the offence committed. Furthermore, internment or imprisonment shall, for such offences, be the only measure adopted
for depriving protected persons of liberty. The courts provided for under Article 66 of the present Convention may at their discretion convert a sentence
of imprisonment to one of internment for the same period.
The penal provisions promulgated by the Occupying Power in accordance
with Articles 64 and 65 may impose the death penalty on a protected person
only in cases where the person is guilty of espionage, of serious acts of sabotage against the military installations of the Occupying Power or of intentional offences which have caused the death of one or more persons, provided
that such offences were punishable by death under the law of the occupied
territory in force before the occupation began.
The death penalty may not be pronounced against a protected person unless
the attention of the court has been particularly called to the fact that since the
accused is not a national of the Occupying Power, he is not bound to it by any
duty of allegiance.
In any case, the death penalty may not be pronounced against a protected
person who was under eighteen years of age at the time of the offence.
Article 69
In all cases, the duration of the period during which a protected person ac- VI. Deduction
cused of an offence is under arrest awaiting trial or punishment shall be de- from sentence
ducted from any period of imprisonment awarded. of period
spent under
Article 70
Protected persons shall not be arrested, prosecuted or convicted by the VII. Offences
Occupying Power for acts committed or for opinions expressed before the committed
occupation, or during a temporary interruption thereof, with the exception before
of breaches of the laws and customs of war. occupation

[Source edition page 178]

174 FOURTH CONVENTION
Nationals of the Occupying Power who, before the outbreak of hostilities,
have sought refuge in the territory of the occupied State, shall not be arrested,
prosecuted, convicted or deported from the occupied territory, except for offences committed after the outbreak of hostilities, or for offences under common law committed before the outbreak of hostilities which, according to the
law of the occupied State, would have justified extradition in time of peace.
Article 71
Penal No sentence shall be pronounced by the competent courts of the Occupying
procedure Power except after a regular trial.
I. General
Accused persons who are prosecuted by the Occupying Power shall be
observations
promptly informed, in writing, in a language which they understand, of
the particulars of the charges preferred against them, and shall be brought
to trial as rapidly as possible. The Protecting Power shall be informed of all
proceedings instituted by the Occupying Power against protected persons in
respect of charges involving the death penalty or imprisonment for two years
or more; it shall be enabled, at any time, to obtain information regarding the
state of such proceedings. Furthermore, the Protecting Power shall be entitled, on request, to be furnished with all particulars of these and of any other
proceedings instituted by the Occupying Power against protected persons.
The notification to the Protecting Power, as provided for in the second
paragraph above, shall be sent immediately, and shall in any case reach the
Protecting Power three weeks before the date of the first hearing. Unless,
at the opening of the trial, evidence is submitted that the provisions of this
Article are fully complied with, the trial shall not proceed. The notification
shall include the following particulars:
a) description of the accused;
b) place of residence or detention;
c) specification of the charge or charges (with mention of the penal provisions under which it is brought);
d) designation of the court which will hear the case;
e) place and date of the first hearing.
Article 72
II. Right of Accused persons shall have the right to present evidence necessary to their
defence defence and may, in particular, call witnesses. They shall have the right to be
assisted by a qualified advocate or counsel of their own choice, who shall be
able to visit them freely and shall enjoy the necessary facilities for preparing
the defence.
Failing a choice by the accused, the Protecting Power may provide him with
an advocate or counsel. When an accused person has to meet a serious charge

[Source edition page 179]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 175
and the Protecting Power is not functioning, the Occupying Power, subject to
the consent of the accused, shall provide an advocate or counsel.
Accused persons shall, unless they freely waive such assistance, be aided by
an interpreter, both during preliminary investigation and during the hearing
in court. They shall have the right at any time to object to the interpreter and
to ask for his replacement.
Article 73
A convicted person shall have the right of appeal provided for by the laws ap- III. Right of
plied by the court. He shall be fully informed of his right to appeal or petition appeal
and of the time limit within which he may do so.
The penal procedure provided in the present Section shall apply, as far as it
is applicable, to appeals. Where the laws applied by the court make no provision for appeals, the convicted person shall have the right to petition against
the finding and sentence to the competent authority of the Occupying Power.
Article 74
Representatives of the Protecting Power shall have the right to attend the trial IV. Assistance
of any protected person, unless the hearing has, as an exceptional measure, by the
to be held in camera in the interests of the security of the Occupying Power, Protecting
which shall then notify the Protecting Power. A notification in respect of the Power
date and place of trial shall be sent to the Protecting Power.
Any judgment involving a sentence of death, or imprisonment for two years
or more, shall be communicated, with the relevant grounds, as rapidly as possible to the Protecting Power. The notification shall contain a reference to the
notification made under Article 71, and, in the case of sentences of imprisonment, the name of the place where the sentence is to be served. A record of
judgments other than those referred to above shall be kept by the court and
shall be open to inspection by representatives of the Protecting Power. Any
period allowed for appeal in the case of sentences involving the death penalty, or imprisonment of two years or more, shall not run until notification of
judgment has been received by the Protecting Power.
Article 75
In no case shall persons condemned to death be deprived of the right of peti- V. Death
tion for pardon or reprieve. sentence
No death sentence shall be carried out before the expiration of a period of at
least six months from the date of receipt by the Protecting Power of the notification of the final judgment confirming such death sentence, or of an order
denying pardon or reprieve.

[Source edition page 180]

176 FOURTH CONVENTION
The six months period of suspension of the death sentence herein prescribed
may be reduced in individual cases in circumstances of grave emergency involving an organized threat to the security of the Occupying Power or its
forces, provided always that the Protecting Power is notified of such reduction and is given reasonable time and opportunity to make representations
to the competent occupying authorities in respect of such death sentences.
Article 76
Treatment Protected persons accused of offences shall be detained in the occupied counof detainees try, and if convicted they shall serve their sentences therein. They shall, if
possible, be separated from other detainees and shall enjoy conditions of food
and hygiene which will be sufficient to keep them in good health, and which
will be at least equal to those obtaining in prisons in the occupied country.
They shall receive the medical attention required by their state of health.
They shall also have the right to receive any spiritual assistance which they
may require.
Women shall be confined in separate quarters and shall be under the direct
supervision of women.
Proper regard shall be paid to the special treatment due to minors.
Protected persons who are detained shall have the right to be visited by delegates of the Protecting Power and of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, in accordance with the provisions of Article 143.
Such persons shall have the right to receive at least one relief parcel monthly.
Article 77
Handing over Protected persons who have been accused of offences or convicted by the
of detainees courts in occupied territory, shall be handed over at the close of occupation,
at the close of with the relevant records, to the authorities of the liberated territory.
occupation
Article 78
Security If the Occupying Power considers it necessary, for imperative reasons of secumeasures. rity, to take safety measures concerning protected persons, it may, at the most,
Internment subject them to assigned residence or to internment.
and assigned
Decisions regarding such assigned residence or internment shall be made acresidence.
cording to a regular procedure to be prescribed by the Occupying Power in
Right of
accordance with the provisions of the present Convention. This procedure
appeal
shall include the right of appeal for the parties concerned. Appeals shall be
decided with the least possible delay. In the event of the decision being upheld, it shall be subject to periodical review, if possible every six months, by a
competent body set up by the said Power.

[Source edition page 181]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 177
Protected persons made subject to assigned residence and thus required
to leave their homes shall enjoy the full benefit of Article 39 of the present
Convention.
SECTION IV
regulations for the treatment of internees
CHAPTER I
General Provisions
Article 79
The Parties to the conflict shall not intern protected persons, except in ac- Cases of
cordance with the provisions of Articles 41, 42, 43, 68 and 78. internment
and applicable
Article 80
Internees shall retain their full civil capacity and shall exercise such attendant Civil capacity
rights as may be compatible with their status.
Article 81
Parties to the conflict who intern protected persons shall be bound to provide Maintenance
free of charge for their maintenance, and to grant them also the medical attention required by their state of health.
No deduction from the allowances, salaries or credits due to the internees
shall be made for the repayment of these costs.
The Detaining Power shall provide for the support of those dependent on the
internees, if such dependents are without adequate means of support or are
unable to earn a living.
Article 82
The Detaining Power shall, as far as possible, accommodate the internees Grouping of
according to their nationality, language and customs. Internees who are na- internees
tionals of the same country shall not be separated merely because they have
different languages.
Throughout the duration of their internment, members of the same family,
and in particular parents and children, shall be lodged together in the same
place of internment, except when separation of a temporary nature is necessitated for reasons of employment or health or for the purposes of enforcement of the provisions of Chapter IX of the present Section. Internees may
request that their children who are left at liberty without parental care shall
be interned with them.

[Source edition page 182]

178 FOURTH CONVENTION
Wherever possible, interned members of the same family shall be housed in
the same premises and given separate accommodation from other internees,
together with facilities for leading a proper family life.
CHAPTER II
Places of internment
Article 83
Location of The Detaining Power shall not set up places of internment in areas particuplaces of larly exposed to the dangers of war.
internment.
The Detaining Power shall give the enemy Powers, through the intermediary
Marking
of the Protecting Powers, all useful information regarding the geographical
of camps
location of places of internment.
Whenever military considerations permit, internment camps shall be indicated by the letters IC, placed so as to be clearly visible in the daytime from
the air. The Powers concerned may, however, agree upon any other system of
marking. No place other than an internment camp shall be marked as such.
Article 84
Separate Internees shall be accommodated and administered separately from prisoninternment ers of war and from persons deprived of liberty for any other reason.
Article 85
Accommoda- The Detaining Power is bound to take all necessary and possible measures
tion, hygiene to ensure that protected persons shall, from the outset of their internment,
be accommodated in buildings or quarters which afford every possible safeguard as regards hygiene and health, and provide efficient protection against
the rigours of the climate and the effects of the war. In no case shall permanent places of internment be situated in unhealthy areas or in districts the
climate of which is injurious to the internees. In all cases where the district,
in which a protected person is temporarily interned, is in an unhealthy area
or has a climate which is harmful to his health, he shall be removed to a more
suitable place of internment as rapidly as circumstances permit.
The premises shall be fully protected from dampness, adequately heated and
lighted, in particular between dusk and lights out. The sleeping quarters shall
be sufficiently spacious and well ventilated, and the internees shall have suitable bedding and sufficient blankets, account being taken of the climate, and
the age, sex, and state of health of the internees.
Internees shall have for their use, day and night, sanitary conveniences which
conform to the rules of hygiene and are constantly maintained in a state of

[Source edition page 183]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 179
cleanliness. They shall be provided with sufficient water and soap for their
daily personal toilet and for washing their personal laundry; installations
and facilities necessary for this purpose shall be granted to them. Showers or
baths shall also be available. The necessary time shall be set aside for washing
and for cleaning.
Whenever it is necessary, as an exceptional and temporary measure, to accommodate women internees who are not members of a family unit in the same
place of internment as men, the provision of separate sleeping quarters and
sanitary conveniences for the use of such women internees shall be obligatory.
Article 86
The Detaining Power shall place at the disposal of interned persons, of what- Premises
ever denomination, premises suitable for the holding of their religious services. for religions
services
Article 87
Canteens shall be installed in every place of internment, except where other Canteens
suitable facilities are available. Their purpose shall be to enable internees to
make purchases, at prices not higher than local market prices, of foodstuffs
and articles of everyday use, including soap and tobacco, such as would increase their personal well-being and comfort.
Profits made by canteens shall be credited to a welfare fund to be set up for each
place of internment, and administered for the benefit of the internees attached
to such place of internment. The Internee Committee provided for in Article 102
shall have the right to check the management of the canteen and of the said fund.
When a place of internment is closed down, the balance of the welfare fund
shall be transferred to the welfare fund of a place of internment for internees
of the same nationality, or, if such a place does not exist, to a central welfare
fund which shall be administered for the benefit of all internees remaining
in the custody of the Detaining Power. In case of a general release, the said
profits shall be kept by the Detaining Power, subject to any agreement to the
contrary between the Powers concerned.
Article 88
In all places of internment exposed to air raids and other hazards of war, Air raid
shelters adequate in number and structure to ensure the necessary protection shelters.
shall be installed. In case of alarms, the internees shall be free to enter such Protective
shelters as quickly as possible, excepting those who remain for the protection measures
of their quarters against the aforesaid hazards. Any protective measures taken
in favour of the population shall also apply to them.
All due precautions must be taken in places of internment against the danger
of fire.

[Source edition page 184]

180 FOURTH CONVENTION
CHAPTER III
food and clothing
Article 89
Food Daily food rations for internees shall be sufficient in quantity, quality and variety to keep internees in a good state of health and prevent the development
of nutritional deficiencies. Account shall also be taken of the customary diet
of the internees.
Internees shall also be given the means by which they can prepare for themselves any additional food in their possession.
Sufficient drinking water shall be supplied to internees. The use of tobacco
shall be permitted.
Internees who work shall receive additional rations in proportion to the kind
of labour which they perform.
Expectant and nursing mothers and children under fifteen years of age shall
be given additional food, in proportion to their physiological needs.
Article 90
Clothing When taken into custody, internees shall be given all facilities to provide themselves with the necessary clothing, footwear and change of underwear, and later
on, to procure further supplies if required. Should any internees not have sufficient clothing, account being taken of the climate, and be unable to procure
any, it shall be provided free of charge to them by the Detaining Power.
The clothing supplied by the Detaining Power to internees and the outward
markings placed on their own clothes shall not be ignominious nor expose
them to ridicule.
Workers shall receive suitable working outfits, including protective clothing,
whenever the nature of their work so requires.
CHAPTER IV
hygiene and Medical attention
Article 91
Medical Every place of internment shall have an adequate infirmary, under the diattention rection of a qualified doctor, where internees may have the attention they
require, as well as an appropriate diet. Isolation wards shall be set aside for
cases of contagious or mental diseases.
Maternity cases and internees suffering from serious diseases, or whose condition requires special treatment, a surgical operation or hospital care, must be

[Source edition page 185]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 181
admitted to any institution where adequate treatment can be given and shall
receive care not inferior to that provided for the general population.
Internees shall, for preference, have the attention of medical personnel of
their own nationality.
Internees may not be prevented from presenting themselves to the medical
authorities for examination. The medical authorities of the Detaining Power
shall, upon request, issue to every internee who has undergone treatment an
official certificate showing the nature of his illness or injury, and the duration
and nature of the treatment given. A duplicate of this certificate shall be forwarded to the Central Agency provided for in Article 140.
Treatment, including the provision of any apparatus necessary for the maintenance of internees in good health, particularly dentures and other artificial
appliances and spectacles, shall be free of charge to the internee.
Article 92
Medical inspections of internees shall be made at least once a month. Their Medical
purpose shall be, in particular, to supervise the general state of health, nutri- inspections
tion and cleanliness of internees, and to detect contagious diseases, especially
tuberculosis, malaria, and venereal diseases. Such inspections shall include,
in particular, the checking of weight of each internee and, at least once a year,
radioscopic examination.
CHAPTER V
religious, intellectual and Physical activities
Article 93
Internees shall enjoy complete latitude in the exercise of their religious du- Religious
ties, including attendance at the services of their faith, on condition that they duties
comply with the disciplinary routine prescribed by the detaining authorities.
Ministers of religion who are interned shall be allowed to minister freely to
the members of their community. For this purpose, the Detaining Power shall
ensure their equitable allocation amongst the various places of internment in
which there are internees speaking the same language and belonging to the
same religion. Should such ministers be too few in number, the Detaining
Power shall provide them with the necessary facilities, including means of
transport, for moving from one place to another, and they shall be authorized
to visit any internees who are in hospital. Ministers of religion shall be at
liberty to correspond on matters concerning their ministry with the religious
authorities in the country of detention and, as far as possible, with the international religious organizations of their faith. Such correspondence shall

[Source edition page 186]

182 FOURTH CONVENTION
not be considered as forming a part of the quota mentioned in Article 107. It
shall, however, be subject to the provisions of Article 112.
When internees do not have at their disposal the assistance of ministers of
their faith, or should these latter be too few in number, the local religious
authorities of the same faith may appoint, in agreement with the Detaining
Power, a minister of the internees’ faith or, if such a course is feasible from
a denominational point of view, a minister of similar religion or a qualified
layman. The latter shall enjoy the facilities granted to the ministry he has assumed. Persons so appointed shall comply with all regulations laid down by
the Detaining Power in the interests of discipline and security.
Article 94
Recreation, The Detaining Power shall encourage intellectual, educational and recreastudy, sports tional pursuits, sports and games amongst internees, whilst leaving them free
and games to take part in them or not. It shall take all practicable measures to ensure the
exercise thereof, in particular by providing suitable premises.
All possible facilities shall be granted to internees to continue their studies
or to take up new subjects. The education of children and young people shall
be ensured; they shall be allowed to attend schools either within the place of
internment or outside.
Internees shall be given opportunities for physical exercise, sports and outdoor games. For this purpose, sufficient open spaces shall be set aside in all
places of internment. Special playgrounds shall be reserved for children and
young people.
Article 95
Working The Detaining Power shall not employ internees as workers, unless they so
conditions desire. Employment which, if undertaken under compulsion by a protected
person not in internment, would involve a breach of Articles 40 or 51 of the
present Convention, and employment on work which is of a degrading or
humiliating character are in any case prohibited.
After a working period of six weeks, internees shall be free to give up work at
any moment, subject to eight days’ notice.
These provisions constitute no obstacle to the right of the Detaining Power
to employ interned doctors, dentists and other medical personnel in their
professional capacity on behalf of their fellow internees, or to employ internees for administrative and maintenance work in places of internment and to
detail such persons for work in the kitchens or for other domestic tasks, or
to require such persons to undertake duties connected with the protection of
internees against aerial bombardment or other war risks. No internee may,

[Source edition page 187]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 183
however, be required to perform tasks for which he is, in the opinion of a
medical officer, physically unsuited.
The Detaining Power shall take entire responsibility for all working conditions, for medical attention, for the payment of wages, and for ensuring that
all employed internees receive compensation for occupational accidents and
diseases. The standards prescribed for the said working conditions and for
compensation shall be in accordance with the national laws and regulations,
and with the existing practice; they shall in no case be inferior to those obtaining for work of the same nature in the same district. Wages for work done
shall be determined on an equitable basis by special agreements between the
internees, the Detaining Power, and, if the case arises, employers other than
the Detaining Power, due regard being paid to the obligation of the Detaining
Power to provide for free maintenance of internees and for the medical attention which their state of health may require. Internees permanently detailed
for categories of work mentioned in the third paragraph of this Article shall
be paid fair wages by the Detaining Power. The working conditions and the
scale of compensation for occupational accidents and diseases to internees,
thus detailed, shall not be inferior to those applicable to work of the same
nature in the same district.
Article 96
All labour detachments shall remain part of and dependent upon a place of Labour
internment. The competent authorities of the Detaining Power and the com- detachments
mandant of a place of internment shall be responsible for the observance in
a labour detachment of the provisions of the present Convention. The commandant shall keep an up-to-date list of the labour detachments subordinate
to him and shall communicate it to the delegates of the Protecting Power,
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and of other humanitarian
organizations who may visit the places of internment.
CHAPTER VI
Personal Property and financial resources
Article 97
Internees shall be permitted to retain articles of personal use. Monies, Valuables
cheques, bonds, etc., and valuables in their possession may not be taken from and personal
them except in accordance with established procedure. Detailed receipts shall effects
be given therefor.
The amounts shall be paid into the account of every internee as provided for
in Article 98. Such amounts may not be converted into any other currency

[Source edition page 188]

184 FOURTH CONVENTION
unless legislation in force in the territory in which the owner is interned so
requires or the internee gives his consent.
Articles which have above all a personal or sentimental value may not be
taken away.
A woman internee shall not be searched except by a woman.
On release or repatriation, internees shall be given all articles, monies or other valuables taken from them during internment and shall receive in currency
the balance of any credit to their accounts kept in accordance with Article 98,
with the exception of any articles or amounts withheld by the Detaining
Power by virtue of its legislation in force. If the property of an internee is so
withheld, the owner shall receive a detailed receipt.
Family or identity documents in the possession of internees may not be taken
away without a receipt being given. At no time shall internees be left without identity documents. If they have none, they shall be issued with special
documents drawn up by the detaining authorities, which will serve as their
identity papers until the end of their internment.
Internees may keep on their persons a certain amount of money, in cash or in
the shape of purchase coupons, to enable them to make purchases.
Article 98
Financial All internees shall receive regular allowances, sufficient to enable them to
resources purchase goods and articles, such as tobacco, toilet requisites, etc. Such aland lowances may take the form of credits or purchase coupons.
individual
Furthermore, internees may receive allowances from the Power to which they
accounts
owe allegiance, the Protecting Powers, the organizations which may assist them,
or their families, as well as the income on their property in accordance with the
law of the Detaining Power. The amount of allowances granted by the Power
to which they owe allegiance shall be the same for each category of internees
(infirm, sick, pregnant women, etc.), but may not be allocated by that Power
or distributed by the Detaining Power on the basis of discriminations between
internees which are prohibited by Article 27 of the present Convention.
The Detaining Power shall open a regular account for every internee, to which
shall be credited the allowances named in the present Article, the wages earned
and the remittances received, together with such sums taken from him as may
be available under the legislation in force in the territory in which he is interned. Internees shall be granted all facilities consistent with the legislation in
force in such territory to make remittances to their families and to other dependants. They may draw from their accounts the amounts necessary for their
personal expenses, within the limits fixed by the Detaining Power. They shall
at all times be afforded reasonable facilities for consulting and obtaining copies

[Source edition page 189]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 185
of their accounts. A statement of accounts shall be furnished to the Protecting
Power on request, and shall accompany the internee in case of transfer.
CHAPTER VII
administration and discipline
Article 99
Every place of internment shall be put under the authority of a responsible Camp adminofficer, chosen from the regular military forces or the regular civil administra- istration.
tion of the Detaining Power. The officer in charge of the place of internment Posting
must have in his possession a copy of the present Convention in the official of the
language, or one of the official languages, of his country and shall be respon- Convention
sible for its application. The staff in control of internees shall be instructed in and of orders
the provisions of the present Convention and of the administrative measures
adopted to ensure its application.
The text of the present Convention and the texts of special agreements concluded under the said Convention shall be posted inside the place of internment, in a language which the internees understand, or shall be in the
possession of the Internee Committee.
Regulations, orders, notices and publications of every kind shall be communicated to the internees and posted inside the places of internment, in a language which they understand.
Every order and command addressed to internees individually must likewise
be given in a language which they understand.
Article 100
The disciplinary regime in places of internment shall be consistent with hu- General
manitarian principles, and shall in no circumstances include regulations discipline
imposing on internees any physical exertion dangerous to their health or
involving physical or moral victimization. Identification by tattooing or imprinting signs or markings on the body, is prohibited.
In particular, prolonged standing and roll-calls, punishment drill, military
drill and manœuvres, or the reduction of food rations, are prohibited.
Article 101
Internees shall have the right to present to the authorities in whose power Complaints
they are, any petition with regard to the conditions of internment to which and petitions
they are subjected.
They shall also have the right to apply without restriction through the Internee
Committee or, if they consider it necessary, direct to the representatives of the

[Source edition page 190]

186 FOURTH CONVENTION
Protecting Power, in order to indicate to them any points on which they may
have complaints to make with regard to the conditions of internment.
Such petitions and complaints shall be transmitted forthwith and without alteration, and even if the latter are recognized to be unfounded, they may not
occasion any punishment.
Periodic reports on the situation in places of internment and as to the needs
of the internees may be sent by the Internee Committees to the representatives of the Protecting Powers.
Article 102
Internee In every place of internment, the internees shall freely elect by secret ballot
Committees every six months, the members of a Committee empowered to represent them
I. Election of before the Detaining and the Protecting Powers, the International Commitmembers tee of the Red Cross and any other organization which may assist them. The
members of the Committee shall be eligible for re-election.
Internees so elected shall enter upon their duties after their election has been
approved by the detaining authorities. The reasons for any refusals or dismissals shall be communicated to the Protecting Powers concerned.
Article 103
II. Duties The Internee Committees shall further the physical, spiritual and intellectual
well-being of the internees.
In case the internees decide, in particular, to organize a system of mutual
assistance amongst themselves, this organization would be within the competence of the Committees in addition to the special duties entrusted to them
under other provisions of the present Convention.
Article 104
III. Members of Internee Committees shall not be required to perform any other
Prerogatives work, if the accomplishment of their duties is rendered more difficult thereby.
Members of Internee Committees may appoint from amongst the internees
such assistants as they may require. All material facilities shall be granted to
them, particularly a certain freedom of movement necessary for the accomplishment of their duties (visits to labour detachments, receipt of supplies, etc.).
All facilities shall likewise be accorded to members of Internee Committees
for communication by post and telegraph with the detaining authorities,
the Protecting Powers, the International Committee of the Red Cross and
their delegates, and with the organizations which give assistance to internees, Committee members in labour detachments shall enjoy similar facilities for communication with their Internee Committee in the principal place

[Source edition page 191]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 187
of internment. Such communications shall not be limited, nor considered as
forming a part of the quota mentioned in Article 107.
Members of Internee Committees who are transferred shall be allowed a reasonable time to acquaint their successors with current affairs.
CHAPTER VIII
relations with the exterior
Article 105
Immediately upon interning protected persons, the Detaining Powers shall Notification
inform them, the Power to which they owe allegiance and their Protect- of measures
ing Power of the measures taken for executing the provisions of the present taken
Chapter. The Detaining Powers shall likewise inform the Parties concerned of
any subsequent modifications of such measures.
Article 106
As soon as he is interned, or at the latest not more than one week after his ar- Internment
rival in a place of internment, and likewise in cases of sickness or transfer to card
another place of internment or to a hospital, every internee shall be enabled
to send direct to his family, on the one hand, and to the Central Agency provided for by Article 140, on the other, an internment card similar, if possible,
to the model annexed to the present Convention, informing his relatives of
his detention, address and state of health. The said cards shall be forwarded
as rapidly as possible and may not be delayed in any way.
Article 107
Internees shall be allowed to send and receive letters and cards. If the Detain- Corresponing Power deems it necessary to limit the number of letters and cards sent by dence
each internee, the said number shall not be less than two letters and four cards
monthly; these shall be drawn up so as to conform as closely as possible to the
models annexed to the present Convention. If limitations must be placed on
the correspondence addressed to internees, they may be ordered only by the
Power to which such internees owe allegiance, possibly at the request of the
Detaining Power. Such letters and cards must be conveyed with reasonable
despatch; they may not be delayed or retained for disciplinary reasons.
Internees who have been a long time without news, or who find it impossible
to receive news from their relatives, or to give them news by the ordinary
postal route, as well as those who are at a considerable distance from their
homes, shall be allowed to send telegrams, the charges being paid by them in
the currency at their disposal. They shall likewise benefit by this provision in
cases which are recognized to be urgent.

[Source edition page 192]

188 FOURTH CONVENTION
As a rule, internees’ mail shall be written in their own language. The Parties to
the conflict may authorize correspondence in other languages.
Article 108
Relief Internees shall be allowed to receive, by post or by any other means, individual
shipments parcels or collective shipments containing in particular foodstuffs, clothing,
I. General medical supplies, as well as books and objects of a devotional, educational or
principles recreational character which may meet their needs. Such shipments shall in
no way free the Detaining Power from the obligations imposed upon it by
virtue of the present Convention.
Should military necessity require the quantity of such shipments to be limited, due notice thereof shall be given to the Protecting Power and to the
International Committee of the Red Cross, or to any other organization giving assistance to the internees and responsible for the forwarding of such
shipments.
The conditions for the sending of individual parcels and collective shipments
shall, if necessary, be the subject of special agreements between the Powers
concerned, which may in no case delay the receipt by the internees of relief
supplies. Parcels of clothing and foodstuffs may not include books. Medical
relief supplies shall, as a rule, be sent in collective parcels.
Article 109
II. Collective In the absence of special agreements between Parties to the conflict regarding
relief the conditions for the receipt and distribution of collective relief shipments,
the regulations concerning collective relief which are annexed to the present
Convention shall be applied.
The special agreements provided for above shall in no case restrict the right
of Internee Committees to take possession of collective relief shipments intended for internees, to undertake their distribution and to dispose of them
in the interests of the recipients.
Nor shall such agreements restrict the right of representatives of the Protecting
Powers, the International Committee of the Red Cross, or any other organization giving assistance to internees and responsible for the forwarding of collective shipments, to supervise their distribution to the recipients.
Article 110
III. Exemp- All relief shipments for internees shall be exempt from import, customs and
tion from other dues.
postal and
All matter sent by mail, including relief parcels sent by parcel post and remittransport
tances of money, addressed from other countries to internees or despatched
charges
by them through the post office, either direct or through the Information

[Source edition page 193]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 189
Bureaux provided for in Article 136 and the Central Information Agency
provided for in Article 140, shall be exempt from all postal dues both in the
countries of origin and destination and in intermediate countries. To this end,
in particular, the exemption provided by the Universal Postal Convention of
1947 and by the agreements of the Universal Postal Union in favour of civilians of enemy nationality detained in camps or civilian prisons, shall be
extended to the other interned persons protected by the present Convention.
The countries not signatory to the above-mentioned agreements shall be
bound to grant freedom from charges in the same circumstances.
The cost of transporting relief shipments which are intended for internees and
which, by reason of their weight or any other cause, cannot be sent through
the post office, shall be borne by the Detaining Power in all the territories
under its control. Other Powers which are Parties to the present Convention
shall bear the cost of transport in their respective territories.
Costs connected with the transport of such shipments, which are not covered
by the above paragraphs, shall be charged to the senders.
The High Contracting Parties shall endeavour to reduce, so far as possible,
the charges for telegrams sent by internees, or addressed to them.
Article 111
Should military operations prevent the Powers concerned from fulfilling their Special
obligation to ensure the conveyance of the mail and relief shipments provided for means of
in Articles 106,107, 108 and 113, the Protecting Powers concerned, the Interna- transport
tional Committee of the Red Cross or any other organization duly approved by
the Parties to the conflict may undertake the conveyance of such shipments by
suitable means (rail, motor vehicles, vessels or aircraft, etc.). For this purpose, the
High Contracting Parties shall endeavour to supply them with such transport,
and to allow its circulation, especially by granting the necessary safe-conducts.
Such transport may also be used to convey:
a) correspondence, lists and reports exchanged between the Central
Information Agency referred to in Article 140 and the National Bureaux referred to in Article 136;
b) correspondence and reports relating to internees which the Protecting Powers, the International Committee of the Red Cross or any
other organization assisting the internees exchange either with their
own delegates or with the Parties to the conflict.
These provisions in no way detract from the right of any Party to the conflict
to arrange other means of transport if it should so prefer, nor preclude the
granting of safe-conducts, under mutually agreed conditions, to such means
of transport.

[Source edition page 194]

190 FOURTH CONVENTION
The costs occasioned by the use of such means of transport shall be borne, in
proportion to the importance of the shipments, by the Parties to the conflict
whose nationals are benefited thereby.
Article 112
Censorship The censoring of correspondence addressed to internees or despatched by
and them shall be done as quickly as possible.
examination
The examination of consignments intended for internees shall not be carried
out under conditions that will expose the goods contained in them to deterioration. It shall be done in the presence of the addressee, or of a fellow-internee
duly delegated by him. The delivery to internees of individual or collective consignments shall not be delayed under the pretext of difficulties of censorship.
Any prohibition of correspondence ordered by the Parties to the conflict either for military or political reasons, shall be only temporary and its duration
shall be as short as possible.
Article 113
Execution The Detaining Powers shall provide all reasonable facilities for the transmisand sion, through the Protecting Power or the Central Agency provided for in
transmission Article 140, or as otherwise required, of wills, powers of attorney, letters of auof legal thority, or any other documents intended for internees or despatched by them.
documents
In all cases the Detaining Powers shall facilitate the execution and authentication in due legal form of such documents on behalf of internees, in particular
by allowing them to consult a lawyer.
Article 114
Management The Detaining Power shall afford internees all facilities to enable them to
of property manage their property, provided this is not incompatible with the conditions
of internment and the law which is applicable. For this purpose, the said Power may give them permission to leave the place of internment in urgent cases
and if circumstances allow.
Article 115
Facilities for In all cases where an internee is a party to proceedings in any court, the Depreparation taining Power shall, if he so requests, cause the court to be informed of his
and conduct detention and shall, within legal limits, ensure that all necessary steps are
of cases taken to prevent him from being in any way prejudiced, by reason of his internment, as regards the preparation and conduct of his case or as regards the
execution of any judgment of the court.

[Source edition page 195]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 191
Article 116
Every internee shall be allowed to receive visitors, especially near relatives, at Visits
regular intervals and as frequently as possible.
As far as is possible, internees shall be permitted to visit their homes in urgent
cases, particularly in cases of death or serious illness of relatives.
CHAPTER IX
Penal and disciplinary sanctions
Article 117
Subject to the provisions of the present Chapter, the laws in force in the terri- General
tory in which they are detained will continue to apply to internees who com- provisions.
mit offences during internment. Applicable
legislation
If general laws, regulations or orders declare acts committed by internees to be
punishable, whereas the same acts are not punishable when committed by persons who are not internees, such acts shall entail disciplinary punishments only.
No internee may be punished more than once for the same act, or on the
same count.
Article 118
The courts or authorities shall in passing sentence take as far as possible into Penalties
account the fact that the defendant is not a national of the Detaining Power.
They shall be free to reduce the penalty prescribed for the offence with which
the internee is charged and shall not be obliged, to this end, to apply the minimum sentence prescribed.
Imprisonment in premises without daylight, and, in general, all forms of cruelty without exception are forbidden.
Internees who have served disciplinary or judicial sentences shall not be
treated differently from other internees.
The duration of preventive detention undergone by an internee shall be deducted from any disciplinary or judicial penalty involving confinement to
which he may be sentenced.
Internee Committees shall be informed of all judicial proceedings instituted
against internees whom they represent, and of their result.

[Source edition page 196]

192 FOURTH CONVENTION
Article 119
Disciplinary The disciplinary punishments applicable to internees shall be the following:
punishments
1) A fine which shall not exceed 50 per cent of the wages which the internee
would otherwise receive under the provisions of Article 95 during a period of not more than thirty days.
2) Discontinuance of privileges granted over and above the treatment provided for by the present Convention.
3) Fatigue duties, not exceeding two hours daily, in connection with the
maintenance of the place of internment.
4) Confinement.
In no case shall disciplinary penalties be inhuman, brutal or dangerous for
the health of internees. Account shall be taken of the internee’s age, sex and
state of health.
The duration of any single punishment shall in no case exceed a maximum of
thirty consecutive days, even if the internee is answerable for several breaches
of discipline when his case is dealt with, whether such breaches are connected
or not.
Article 120
Escapes Internees who are recaptured after having escaped or when attempting to escape, shall be liable only to disciplinary punishment in respect of this act,
even if it is a repeated offence.
Article 118, paragraph 3, notwithstanding, internees punished as a result of
escape or attempt to escape, may be subjected to special surveillance, on condition that such surveillance does not affect the state of their health, that it is
exercised in a place of internment and that it does not entail the abolition of
any of the safeguards granted by the present Convention.
Internees who aid and abet an escape, or attempt to escape, shall be liable on
this count to disciplinary punishment only.
Article 121
Connected Escape, or attempt to escape, even if it is a repeated offence, shall not be
offences deemed an aggravating circumstance in cases where an internee is prosecuted
for offences committed during his escape.
The Parties to the conflict shall ensure that the competent authorities exercise
leniency in deciding whether punishment inflicted for an offence shall be of a
disciplinary or judicial nature, especially in respect of acts committed in connection with an escape, whether successful or not.

[Source edition page 197]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 193
Article 122
Acts which constitute offences against discipline shall be investigated imme- Investidiately. This rule shall be applied, in particular, in cases of escape or attempt to gations.
escape. Recaptured internees shall be handed over to the competent authori- Confinement
ties as soon as possible. awaiting
hearing
In case of offences against discipline, confinement awaiting trial shall be reduced
to an absolute minimum for all internees, and shall not exceed fourteen days.
Its duration shall in any case be deducted from any sentence of confinement.
The provisions of Articles 124 and 125 shall apply to internees who are in
confinement awaiting trial for offences against discipline.
Article 123
Without prejudice to the competence of courts and higher authorities, dis- Competent
ciplinary punishment may be ordered only by the commandant of the place authorities.
of internment, or by a responsible officer or official who replaces him, or to Procedure
whom he has delegated his disciplinary powers.
Before any disciplinary punishment is awarded, the accused internee shall be
given precise information regarding the offences of which he is accused, and
given an opportunity of explaining his conduct and of defending himself. He
shall be permitted, in particular, to call witnesses and to have recourse, if necessary, to the services of a qualified interpreter. The decision shall be announced
in the presence of the accused and of a member of the Internee Committee.
The period elapsing between the time of award of a disciplinary punishment
and its execution shall not exceed one month.
When an internee is awarded a further disciplinary punishment, a period of
at least three days shall elapse between the execution of any two of the punishments, if the duration of one of these is ten days or more.
A record of disciplinary punishments shall be maintained by the commandant of the place of internment and shall be open to inspection by representatives of the Protecting Power.
Article 124
Internees shall not in any case be transferred to penitentiary establishments Premises for
(prisons, penitentiaries, convict prisons, etc.) to undergo disciplinary punish- disciplinary
ment therein. punishments
The premises in which disciplinary punishments are undergone shall conform to sanitary requirements; they shall in particular be provided with adequate bedding. Internees undergoing punishment shall be enabled to keep
themselves in a state of cleanliness.

[Source edition page 198]

194 FOURTH CONVENTION
Women internees undergoing disciplinary punishment shall be confined in
separate quarters from male internees and shall be under the immediate supervision of women.
Article 125
Essential Internees awarded disciplinary punishment shall be allowed to exercise and
safeguards to stay in the open air at least two hours daily.
They shall be allowed, if they so request, to be present at the daily medical inspections. They shall receive the attention which their state of health requires
and, if necessary, shall be removed to the infirmary of the place of internment
or to a hospital.
They shall have permission to read and write, likewise to send and receive letters. Parcels and remittances of money, however, may be withheld from them
until the completion of their punishment; such consignments shall meanwhile be entrusted to the Internee Committee, who will hand over to the
infirmary the perishable goods contained in the parcels.
No internee given a disciplinary punishment may be deprived of the benefit
of the provisions of Articles 107 and 143 of the present Convention.
Article 126
Provisions The provisions of Articles 71 to 76 inclusive shall apply, by analogy, to proceedapplicable ings against internees who are in the national territory of the Detaining Power.
to judicial
proceedings
CHAPTER X
transfers of internees
Article 127
Conditions The transfer of internees shall always be effected humanely. As a general rule,
it shall be carried out by rail or other means of transport, and under conditions at least equal to those obtaining for the forces of the Detaining Power
in their changes of station. If, as an exceptional measure, such removals have
to be effected on foot, they may not take place unless the internees are in a
fit state of health, and may not in any case expose them to excessive fatigue.
The Detaining Power shall supply internees during transfer with drinking
water and food sufficient in quantity, quality and variety to maintain them
in good health, and also with the necessary clothing, adequate shelter and
the necessary medical attention. The Detaining Power shall take all suitable
precautions to ensure their safety during transfer, and shall establish before
their departure a complete list of all internees transferred.

[Source edition page 199]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 195
Sick, wounded or infirm internees and maternity cases shall not be transferred if the journey would be seriously detrimental to them, unless their
safety imperatively so demands.
If the combat zone draws close to a place of internment, the internees in the
said place shall not be transferred unless their removal can be carried out in
adequate conditions of safety, or unless they are exposed to greater risks by
remaining on the spot than by being transferred.
When making decisions regarding the transfer of internees, the Detaining
Power shall take their interests into account and, in particular, shall not do
anything to increase the difficulties of repatriating them or returning them to
their own homes.
Article 128
In the event of transfer, internees shall be officially advised of their departure Method
and of their new postal address. Such notification shall be given in time for
them to pack their luggage and inform their next of kin.
They shall be allowed to take with them their personal effects, and the correspondence and parcels which have arrived for them. The weight of such
baggage may be limited if the conditions of transfer so require, but in no case
to less than twenty-five kilograms per internee.
Mail and parcels addressed to their former place of internment shall be forwarded to them without delay.
The commandant of the place of internment shall take, in agreement with
the Internee Committee, any measures needed to ensure the transport of the
internees’ community property and of the luggage the internees are unable
to take with them in consequence of restrictions imposed by virtue of the
second paragraph.
CHAPTER XI
deaths
Article 129
The wills of internees shall be received for safekeeping by the responsible au- Wills. Death
thorities; and in the event of the death of an internee his will shall be trans- certificates
mitted without delay to a person whom he has previously designated.
Deaths of internees shall be certified in every case by a doctor, and a death
certificate shall be made out, showing the causes of death and the conditions
under which it occurred.

[Source edition page 200]

196 FOURTH CONVENTION
An official record of the death, duly registered, shall be drawn up in accordance with the procedure relating thereto in force in the territory where the
place of internment is situated, and a duly certified copy of such record shall
be transmitted without delay to the Protecting Power as well as to the Central
Agency referred to in Article 140.
Article 130
Burial. The detaining authorities shall ensure that internees who die while interned
Cremation are honourably buried, if possible according to the rites of the religion to
which they belonged and that their graves are respected, properly maintained,
and marked in such a way that they can always be recognized.
Deceased internees shall be buried in individual graves unless unavoidable
circumstances require the use of collective graves. Bodies may be cremated
only for imperative reasons of hygiene, on account of the religion of the deceased or in accordance with his expressed wish to this effect. In case of cremation, the fact shall be stated and the reasons given in the death certificate
of the deceased. The ashes shall be retained for safekeeping by the detaining
authorities and shall be transferred as soon as possible to the next of kin on
their request.
As soon as circumstances permit, and not later than the close of hostilities,
the Detaining Power shall forward lists of graves of deceased internees to the
Powers on whom the deceased internees depended, through the Information
Bureaux provided for in Article 136. Such lists shall include all particulars
necessary for the identification of the deceased internees, as well as the exact
location of their graves.
Article 131
Internees Every death or serious injury of an internee, caused or suspected to have been
killed or caused by a sentry, another internee or any other person, as well as any death
injured the cause of which is unknown, shall be immediately followed by an official
in special enquiry by the Detaining Power.
circum-
A communication on this subject shall be sent immediately to the Protecting
stances
Power. The evidence of any witnesses shall be taken, and a report including
such evidence shall be prepared and forwarded to the said Protecting Power.
If the enquiry indicates the guilt of one or more persons, the Detaining Power
shall take all necessary steps to ensure the prosecution of the person or persons responsible.

[Source edition page 201]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 197
CHAPTER XII
release, repatriation and accommodation in neutral countries
Article 132
Each interned person shall be released by the Detaining Power as soon as the During
reasons which necessitated his internment no longer exist. hostilities or
The Parties to the conflict shall, moreover, endeavour during the course of occupation
hostilities, to conclude agreements for the release, the repatriation, the return
to places of residence or the accommodation in a neutral country of certain
classes of internees, in particular children, pregnant women and mothers
with infants and young children, wounded and sick, and internees who have
been detained for a long time.
Article 133
Internment shall cease as soon as possible after the close of hostilities. After the
close of
Internees in the territory of a Party to the conflict, against whom penal
hostilities
proceedings are pending for offences not exclusively subject to disciplinary
penalties, may be detained until the close of such proceedings and, if circumstances require, until the completion of the penalty. The same shall apply
to internees who have been previously sentenced to a punishment depriving
them of liberty.
By agreement between the Detaining Power and the Powers concerned, committees may be set up after the close of hostilities, or of the occupation of
territories, to search for dispersed internees.
Article 134
The High Contracting Parties shall endeavour, upon the close of hostilities Repatriation
or occupation, to ensure the return of all internees to their last place of resi- and return to
dence, or to facilitate their repatriation. last place of
residence
Article 135
The Detaining Power shall bear the expense of returning released internees Costs
to the places where they were residing when interned, or, if it took them into
custody while they were in transit or on the high seas, the cost of completing
their journey or of their return to their point of departure.
Where a Detaining Power refuses permission to reside in its territory to a
released internee who previously had his permanent domicile therein, such
Detaining Power shall pay the cost of the said internee’s repatriation. If, however, the internee elects to return to his country on his own responsibility or
in obedience to the Government of the Power to which he owes allegiance,
the Detaining Power need not pay the expenses of his journey beyond the

[Source edition page 202]

198 FOURTH CONVENTION
point of his departure from its territory. The Detaining Power need not pay
the costs of repatriation of an internee who was interned at his own request.
If internees are transferred in accordance with Article 45, the transferring and
receiving Powers shall agree on the portion of the above costs to be borne by
each.
The foregoing shall not prejudice such special agreements as may be concluded between Parties to the conflict concerning the exchange and repatriation
of their nationals in enemy hands.
SECTION V
information bureaux and central agency
Article 136
National Upon the outbreak of a conflict and in all cases of occupation, each of the
Bureaux Parties to the conflict shall establish an official Information Bureau responsible for receiving and transmitting information in respect of the protected
persons who are in its power.
Each of the Parties to the conflict shall, within the shortest possible period,
give its Bureau information of any measure taken by it concerning any protected persons who are kept in custody for more than two weeks, who are
subjected to assigned residence or who are interned. It shall, furthermore,
require its various departments concerned with such matters to provide the
aforesaid Bureau promptly with information concerning all changes pertaining to these protected persons, as, for example, transfers, releases, repatriations, escapes, admittances to hospitals, births and deaths.
Article 137
Transmission Each national Bureau shall immediately forward information concernof ing protected persons by the most rapid means to the Powers of whom the
information aforesaid persons are nationals, or to Powers in whose territory they resided,
through the intermediary of the Protecting Powers and likewise through the
Central Agency provided for in Article 140. The Bureaux shall also reply to all
enquiries which may be received regarding protected persons.
Information Bureaux shall transmit information concerning a protected person unless its transmission might be detrimental to the person concerned
or to his or her relatives. Even in such a case, the information may not be
withheld from the Central Agency which, upon being notified of the circumstances, will take the necessary precautions indicated in Article 140.
All communications in writing made by any Bureau shall be authenticated by
a signature or a seal.

[Source edition page 203]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 199
Article 138
The information received by the national Bureau and transmitted by it shall Particulars
be of such a character as to make it possible to identify the protected person required
exactly and to advise his next of kin quickly. The information in respect of
each person shall include at least his surname, first names, place and date of
birth, nationality, last residence and distinguishing characteristics, the first
name of the father and the maiden name of the mother, the date, place and
nature of the action taken with regard to the individual, the address at which
correspondence may be sent to him and the name and address of the person
to be informed.
Likewise, information regarding the state of health of internees who are seriously ill or seriously wounded shall be supplied regularly and if possible every
week.
Article 139
Each national Information Bureau shall, furthermore, be responsible for col- Forwarding
lecting all personal valuables left by protected persons mentioned in Article of personal
136, in particular those who have been repatriated or released, or who have valuables
escaped or died; it shall forward the said valuables to those concerned, either
direct, or, if necessary, through the Central Agency. Such articles shall be sent
by the Bureau in sealed packets which shall be accompanied by statements
giving clear and full identity particulars of the person to whom the articles
belonged, and by a complete list of the contents of the parcel. Detailed records
shall be maintained of the receipt and despatch of all such valuables.
Article 140
A Central Information Agency for protected persons, in particular for intern- Central
ees, shall be created in a neutral country. The International Committee of the Agency
Red Cross shall, if it deems necessary, propose to the Powers concerned the
organization of such an Agency, which may be the same as that provided for
in Article 123 of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of August 12, 1949.
The function of the Agency shall be to collect all information of the type
set forth in Article 136 which it may obtain through official or private channels and to transmit it as rapidly as possible to the countries of origin or of
residence of the persons concerned, except in cases where such transmissions
might be detrimental to the persons whom the said information concerns, or
to their relatives. It shall receive from the Parties to the conflict all reasonable
facilities for effecting such transmissions.

[Source edition page 204]

200 FOURTH CONVENTION
The High Contracting Parties, and in particular those whose nationals benefit
by the services of the Central Agency, are requested to give the said Agency
the financial aid it may require.
The foregoing provisions shall in no way be interpreted as restricting the humanitarian activities of the International Committee of the Red Cross and of
the relief Societies described in Article 142.
Article 141
Exemption The national Information Bureaux and the Central Information Agency shall
from charges enjoy free postage for all mail, likewise the exemptions provided for in Article 110, and further, so far as possible, exemption from telegraphic charges or, at
least, greatly reduced rates.
PART IV
execution of the convention
SECTION I
General provisions
Article 142
Relief Subject to the measures which the Detaining Powers may consider essential
societies to ensure their security or to meet any other reasonable need, the representaand other tives of religious organizations, relief societies, or any other organizations asorganizations sisting the protected persons, shall receive from these Powers, for themselves
or their duly accredited agents, all facilities for visiting the protected persons,
for distributing relief supplies and material from any source, intended for
educational, recreational or religious purposes, or for assisting them in organizing their leisure time within the places of internment. Such societies or
organizations may be constituted in the territory of the Detaining Power, or
in any other country, or they may have an international character.
The Detaining Power may limit the number of societies and organizations
whose delegates are allowed to carry out their activities in its territory and
under its supervision, on condition, however, that such limitation shall not
hinder the supply of effective and adequate relief to all protected persons.
The special position of the International Committee of the Red Cross in this
field shall be recognized and respected at all times.

[Source edition page 205]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 201
Article 143
Representatives or delegates of the Protecting Powers shall have permission Supervision
to go to all places where protected persons are, particularly to places of internment, detention and work.
They shall have access to all premises occupied by protected persons and shall
be able to interview the latter without witnesses, personally or through an
interpreter.
Such visits may not be prohibited except for reasons of imperative military
necessity, and then only as an exceptional and temporary measure. Their duration and frequency shall not be restricted.
Such representatives and delegates shall have full liberty to select the places
they wish to visit. The Detaining or Occupying Power, the Protecting Power
and when occasion arises the Power of origin of the persons to be visited,
may agree that compatriots of the internees shall be permitted to participate
in the visits.
The delegates of the International Committee of the Red Cross shall also enjoy the above prerogatives. The appointment of such delegates shall be submitted to the approval of the Power governing the territories where they will
carry out their duties.
Article 144
The High Contracting Parties undertake, in time of peace as in time of war, to II. Grave
disseminate the text of the present Convention as widely as possible in their breaches
respective countries, and, in particular, to include the study thereof in their
programmes of military and, if possible, civil instruction, so that the principles thereof may become known to the entire population.
Any civilian, military, police or other authorities, who in time of war assume
responsibilities in respect of protected persons, must possess the text of the
Convention and be specially instructed as to its provisions.
Article 145
The High Contracting Parties shall communicate to one another through the Dissemina-
Swiss Federal Council and, during hostilities, through the Protecting Powers, tion of the
the official translations of the present Convention, as well as the laws and Convention
regulations which they may adopt to ensure the application thereof.
Article 146
The High Contracting Parties undertake to enact any legislation necessary to Translations.
provide effective penal sanctions for persons committing, or ordering to be Rules of
committed, any of the grave breaches of the present Convention defined in application
the following Article.

[Source edition page 206]

202 FOURTH CONVENTION
Each High Contracting Party shall be under the obligation to search for persons alleged to have committed, or to have ordered to be committed, such
grave breaches, and shall bring such persons, regardless of their nationality,
before its own courts. It may also, if it prefers, and in accordance with the
provisions of its own legislation, hand such persons over for trial to another
High Contracting Party concerned, provided such High Contracting Party
has made out a prima facie case.
Each High Contracting Party shall take measures necessary for the suppression of all acts contrary to the provisions of the present Convention other
than the grave breaches defined in the following Article.
In all circumstances, the accused persons shall benefit by safeguards of proper trial and defence, which shall not be less favourable than those provided
by Article 105 and those following of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Treatment of Prisoners of War of August 12, 1949.
Article 147
Penal Grave breaches to which the preceding Article relates shall be those involving
sanctions any of the following acts, if committed against persons or property protect-
I. General ed by the present Convention: wilful killing, torture or inhuman treatment,
observations including biological experiments, wilfully causing great suffering or serious
injury to body or health, unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement of a protected person, compelling a protected person to serve in the
forces of a hostile Power, or wilfully depriving a protected person of the rights
of fair and regular trial prescribed in the present Convention, taking of hostages and extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified
by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly.
Article 148
III. Responsibi- No High Contracting Party shall be allowed to absolve itself or any other
lities of the High Contracting Party of any liability incurred by itself or by another High
Contracting Contracting Party in respect of breaches referred to in the preceding Article.
Parties
Article 149
Enquiry At the request of a Party to the conflict, an enquiry shall be instituted, in a
procedure manner to be decided between the interested Parties, concerning any alleged
violation of the Convention.
If agreement has not been reached concerning the procedure for the enquiry,
the Parties should agree on the choice of an umpire who will decide upon the
procedure to be followed. Once the violation has been established, the Parties
to the conflict shall put an end to it and shall repress it with the least possible
delay.

[Source edition page 207]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 203
SECTION II
final provisions
Article 150
The present Convention is established in English and in French. Both texts Languages
are equally authentic.
The Swiss Federal Council shall arrange for official translations of the
Convention to be made in the Russian and Spanish languages.
Article 151
The present Convention, which bears the date of this day, is open to signature Signature
until February 12, 1950, in the name of the Powers represented at the Conference which opened at Geneva on April 21, 1949.
Article 152
The present Convention shall be ratified as soon as possible and the ratifica- Ratification
tions shall be deposited at Berne.
A record shall be drawn up of the deposit of each instrument of ratification
and certified copies of this record shall be transmitted by the Swiss Federal
Council to all the Powers in whose name the Convention has been signed, or
whose accession has been notified.
Article 153
The present Convention shall come into force six months after not less than Coming
two instruments of ratification have been deposited. into force
Thereafter, it shall come into force for each High Contracting Party six
months after the deposit of the instrument of ratification.
Article 154
In the relations between the Powers who are bound by the Hague Conven- Relation with
tions respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land, whether that of July the Hague
29, 1899, or that of October 18, 1907, and who are parties to the present Con- Conventions
vention, this last Convention shall be supplementary to Sections II and III of
the Regulations annexed to the above-mentioned Conventions of The Hague.
Article 155
From the date of its coming into force, it shall be open to any Power in whose Accession
name the present Convention has not been signed, to accede to this Convention.

[Source edition page 208]

204 FOURTH CONVENTION
Article 156
Notification Accessions shall be notified in writing to the Swiss Federal Council, and shall
of accessions take effect six months after the date on which they are received.
The Swiss Federal Council shall communicate the accessions to all the Powers
in whose name the Convention has been signed, or whose accession has been
notified.
Article 157
Immediate The situations provided for in Articles 2 and 3 shall give immediate effect to
effect ratifications deposited and accessions notified by the Parties to the conflict
before or after the beginning of hostilities or occupation. The Swiss Federal
Council shall communicate by the quickest method any ratifications or accessions received from Parties to the conflict.
Article 158
Denunciation Each of the High Contracting Parties shall be at liberty to denounce the
present Convention.
The denunciation shall be notified in writing to the Swiss Federal Council,
which shall transmit it to the Governments of all the High Contracting Parties.
The denunciation shall take effect one year after the notification thereof has
been made to the Swiss Federal Council. However, a denunciation of which
notification has been made at a time when the denouncing Power is involved
in a conflict shall not take effect until peace has been concluded, and until
after operations connected with the release, repatriation and re-establishment
of the persons protected by the present Convention have been terminated.
The denunciation shall have effect only in respect of the denouncing Power.
It shall in no way impair the obligations which the Parties to the conflict shall
remain bound to fulfil by virtue of the principles of the law of nations, as they
result from the usages established among civilized peoples, from the laws of
humanity and the dictates of the public conscience.

[Source edition page 209]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 205
Article 159
The Swiss Federal Council shall register the present Convention with the Sec- Registration
retariat of the United Nations. The Swiss Federal Council shall also inform with
the Secretariat of the United Nations of all ratifications, accessions and de- the United
nunciations received by it with respect to the present Convention. Nations
In witness whereof the undersigned, having deposited their respective
full powers, have signed the present Convention.
Done at Geneva this twelfth day of August 1949, in the English and French
languages. The original shall be deposited in the Archives of the Swiss
Confederation. The Swiss Federal Council shall transmit certified copies
thereof to each of the signatory and acceding States.

[Source edition page 210]

206 FOURTH CONVENTION
ANNEX I
draft aGreeMent relatinG to hosPital
and safety Zones and localities
Article 1
Hospital and safety zones shall be strictly reserved for the persons mentioned in Article 23 of
the Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in
Armed Forces in the Field of August 12, 1949, and in Article 14 of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of August 12, 1949, and for the
personnel entrusted with the organization and administration of these zones and localities
and with the care of the persons therein assembled.
Nevertheless, persons whose permanent residence is within such zones shall have the right
to stay there.
Article 2
No persons residing, in whatever capacity, in a hospital and safety zone shall perform any
work, either within or without the zone, directly connected with military operations or the
production of war material.
Article 3
The Power establishing a hospital and safety zone shall take all necessary measures to prohibit
access to all persons who have no right of residence or entry therein.
Article 4
Hospital and safety zones shall fulfil the following conditions:
a) They shall comprise only a small part of the territory governed by the Power which
has established them.
b) They shall be thinly populated in relation to the possibilities of accommodation.
c) They shall be far removed and free from all military objectives, or large industrial or
administrative establishments.
d) They shall not be situated in areas which, according to every probability, may become
important for the conduct of the war.
Article 5
Hospital and safety zones shall be subject to the following obligations:
a) The lines of communication and means of transport which they possess shall not be
used for the transport of military personnel or material, even in transit.
b) They shall in no case be defended by military means.

[Source edition page 211]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 207
Article 6
Hospital and safety zones shall be marked by means of oblique red bands on a white ground,
placed on the buildings and outer precincts.
Zones reserved exclusively for the wounded and sick may be marked by means of the Red
Cross (Red Crescent, Red Lion and Sun) emblem on a white ground.
They may be similarly marked at night by means of appropriate illumination.
Article 7
The Powers shall communicate to all the High Contracting Parties in peacetime or on the outbreak of hostilities, a list of the hospital and safety zones in the territories governed by them.
They shall also give notice of any new zones set up during hostilities.
As soon as the adverse Party has received the above-mentioned notification, the zone shall be
regularly established.
If, however, the adverse Party considers that the conditions of the present agreement have not
been fulfilled, it may refuse to recognize the zone by giving immediate notice thereof to the
Party responsible for the said zone, or may make its recognition of such zone dependent upon
the institution of the control provided for in Article 8.
Article 8
Any Power having recognized one or several hospital and safety zones instituted by the adverse Party shall be entitled to demand control by one or more Special Commissions, for the
purpose of ascertaining if the zones fulfil the conditions and obligations stipulated in the
present agreement.
For this purpose, members of the Special Commissions shall at all times have free access to
the various zones and may even reside there permanently. They shall be given all facilities for
their duties of inspection.
Article 9
Should the Special Commissions note any facts which they consider contrary to the stipulations of the present agreement, they shall at once draw the attention of the Power governing
the said zone to these facts, and shall fix a time limit of five days within which the matter
should be rectified. They shall duly notify the Power who has recognized the zone.
If, when the time limit has expired, the Power governing the zone has not complied with the
warning, the adverse Party may declare that it is no longer bound by the present agreement
in respect of the said zone.
Article 10
Any Power setting up one or more hospital and safety zones, and the adverse Parties to whom
their existence has been notified, shall nominate or have nominated by the Protecting Powers

[Source edition page 212]

208 FOURTH CONVENTION
or by other neutral Powers, persons eligible to be members of the Special Commissions mentioned in Articles 8 and 9.
Article 11
In no circumstances may hospital and safety zones be the object of attack. They shall be protected and respected at all times by the Parties to the conflict.
Article 12
In the case of occupation of a territory, the hospital and safety zones therein shall continue to
be respected and utilized as such.
Their purpose may, however, be modified by the Occupying Power, on condition that all measures are taken to ensure the safety of the persons accommodated.
Article 13
The present agreement shall also apply to localities which the Powers may utilize for the same
purposes as hospital and safety zones.

[Source edition page 213]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 209
ANNEX II
draft reGulations
concerninG collective relief
Article 1
The Internee Committees shall be allowed to distribute collective relief shipments for which
they are responsible, to all internees who are dependent for administration on the said Committee’s place of internment, including those internees who are in hospitals, or in prisons or
other penitentiary establishments.
Article 2
The distribution of collective relief shipments shall be effected in accordance with the instructions of the donors and with a plan drawn up by the Internee Committees. The issue of
medical stores shall, however, be made for preference in agreement with the senior medical
officers, and the latter may, in hospitals and infirmaries, waive the said instructions, if the
needs of their patients so demand. Within the limits thus defined, the distribution shall always be carried out equitably.
Article 3
Members of Internee Committees shall be allowed to go to the railway stations or other points
of arrival of relief supplies near their places of internment so as to enable them to verify the
quantity as well as the quality of the goods received and to make out detailed reports thereon
for the donors.
Article 4
Internee Committees shall be given the facilities necessary for verifying whether the distribution of collective relief in all sub-divisions and annexes of their places of internment has been
carried out in accordance with their instructions.
Article 5
Internee Committees shall be allowed to complete, and to cause to be completed by members
of the Internee Committees in labour detachments or by the senior medical officers of infirmaries and hospitals, forms or questionnaires intended for the donors, relating to collective
relief supplies (distribution, requirements, quantities, etc.). Such forms and questionnaires,
duly completed, shall be forwarded to the donors without delay.
Article 6
In order to secure the regular distribution of collective relief supplies to the internees in their
place of internment, and to meet any needs that may arise through the arrival of fresh parties of internees, the Internee Committees shall be allowed to create and maintain sufficient

[Source edition page 214]

210 FOURTH CONVENTION
reserve stocks of collective relief. For this purpose, they shall have suitable warehouses at their
disposal; each warehouse shall be provided with two locks, the Internee Committee holding
the keys of one lock, and the commandant of the place of internment the keys of the other.
Article 7
The High Contracting Parties, and the Detaining Powers in particular, shall, so far as is in any
way possible and subject to the regulations governing the food supply of the population, authorize purchases of goods to be made in their territories for the distribution of collective relief
to the internees. They shall likewise facilitate the transfer of funds and other financial measures
of a technical or administrative nature taken for the purpose of making such purchases.
Article 8
The foregoing provisions shall not constitute an obstacle to the right of internees to receive
collective relief before their arrival in a place of internment or in the course of their transfer,
nor to the possibility of representatives of the Protecting Power, or of the International Committee of the Red Cross or any other humanitarian organization giving assistance to internees
and responsible for forwarding such supplies, ensuring the distribution thereof to the recipients by any other means they may deem suitable.

[Source edition page 215]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 211
ANNEX III
i. internMent card
CIVILIAN INTERNEE MAIL
Postage free
POST CARD
IMPORTANT
This card must be completed
CENTRAL INFORMATION AGENCY
by each internee immediately
on being interned and each FOR PROTECTED PERSONS
time his address is altered by
reason of transfer to another International Committee
place of internment or to a
of the Red Cross
hospital.
This card is not the same as the
GENEVA
special card which each
internee is allowed to send to (Switzerland)
his relatives.
tnorF
.1
edis
esreveR
.2
Write legibly and in block letters — 1. Nationality........................................................
2. Surname 3. First names (in full) 4. First name of father
5. Date of birth.................…................ 6. Place of birth...............................................
7. Occupation...................................................................................................................
8. Address before detention...........................................................................................
9. Address of next of kin.................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................................
10. Interned on: *...............................................................................................................
(or)
Coming from (hospital, etc.) on: .....................................................................................
11. State of health *.......................................................................................................................
12. Present address............................................................................................................
13. Date.....................…........................ 14. Signature......................................................
* Strike out what is not applicable—Do not add any remarks—
See explanations overleaf.
(Size of internment card — 10 x 15 cm)

[Source edition page 216]

212 FOURTH CONVENTION
ANNEX III
ii. letter
CIVILIAN INTERNEE SERVICE
Postage free
To
Street and number
Place of destination (in block capitals)
Province or Department
Country (in block capitals)
sserdda tnemnretnI
htrib fo ecalp dna etaD
seman tsrfi dna emanruS
:redneS
(Size of letter — 29 x 15 cm)

[Source edition page 217]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 213
ANNEX III
iii. corresPondence card
CIVILIAN INTERNEE MAIL Postage free
POST CARD
:redneS
seman
tsrfi
dna
emanruS
htrib
fo
ecalp
dna
etaD
sserdda
tnemnretnI
To
Street and number
Place of destination (in block capitals)
Province or Department
Country (in block capitals)
tnorF
.1
edis
esreveR
.2
..............................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................
..............................................................................................................................................................
Write on the dotted lines only and as legibly as possible
(Size of correspondence card — 10 x15 cm)

[Source edition page 219]

GENEVA CONVENTION OF 1949 215
RESOLUTIONS
of the diPloMatic conference of Geneva, 1949
Resolution 1
The Conference recommends that, in the case of a dispute relating to the interpretation or
application of the present Conventions which cannot be settled by other means, the High
Contracting Parties concerned endeavour to agree between themselves to refer such dispute
to the International Court of Justice.
Resolution 2
Whereas circumstances may arise in the event of the outbreak of a future international conflict in which there will be no Protecting Power with whose cooperation and under whose
scrutiny the Conventions for the Protection of Victims of War can be applied; and
whereas Article 10 of the Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the
Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of August 12, 1949, Article 10 of the Geneva
Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked
Members of Armed Forces at Sea of August 12, 1949, Article 10 of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of August 12, 1949, and Article 11 of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of August 12, 1949,
provide that the High Contracting Parties may at any time agree to entrust to a body which offers all guarantees of impartiality and efficacy the duties incumbent on the Protecting Powers
by virtue of the aforesaid Conventions,
the Conference recommends that consideration be given as soon as possible to the advisability of setting up an international body, the functions of which shall be, in the absence of a
Protecting Power, to fulfil the duties performed by Protecting Powers in regard to the application of the Conventions for the Protection of War Victims.
Resolution 3
Whereas agreements may only with difficulty be concluded during hostilities;
whereas Article 28 of the Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the
Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of August 12, 1949, provides that the Parties
to the conflict shall, during hostilities, make arrangements for relieving where possible retained personnel, and shall settle the procedure of such relief;
whereas Article 31 of the same Convention provides that, as from the outbreak of hostilities,
Parties to the conflict may determine by special arrangement the percentage of personnel to
be retained, in proportion to the number of prisoners and the distribution of the said personnel in the camps,
the Conference requests the International Committee of the Red Cross to prepare a model
agreement on the two questions referred to in the two Articles mentioned above and to submit it to the High Contracting Parties for their approval.

[Source edition page 220]

216 RESOLUTIONS
Resolution 4
Whereas Article 33 of the Geneva Convention of July 27, 1929, for the Relief of the Wounded
and Sick in Armies in the Field, concerning the identity documents to be carried by medical
personnel, was only partially observed during the course of the recent war, thus creating serious difficulties for many members of such personnel,
the Conference recommends that States and National Red Cross Societies take all necessary
steps in time of peace to have medical personnel duly provided with the badges and identity
cards prescribed in Article 40 of the new Convention.
Resolution 5
Whereas misuse has frequently been made of the Red Cross emblem,
the Conference recommends that States take strict measures to ensure that the said emblem, as well as other emblems referred to in Article 38 of the Geneva Convention for the
Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of
August 12, 1949, is used only within the limits prescribed by the Geneva Conventions, in
order to safeguard their authority and protect their high significance.
Resolution 6
Whereas the present Conference has not been able to raise the question of the technical study
of means of communication between hospital ships, on the one hand, and warships and military aircraft on the other, since that study went beyond its terms of reference;
whereas this question is of the greatest importance for the safety and efficient operation of
hospital ships,
the Conference recommends that the High Contracting Parties will, in the near future, instruct a Committee of Experts to examine technical improvements of modern means of communication between hospital ships, on the one hand, and warships and military aircraft, on
the other, and also to study the possibility of drawing up an International Code laying down
precise regulations for the use of those means, in order that hospital ships may be assured of
the maximum protection and be enabled to operate with the maximum efficiency.
Resolution 7
The Conference, being desirous of securing the maximum protection for hospital ships, expresses the hope that all High Contracting Parties to the Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed forces at
Sea of August 12, 1949, will arrange that, when ever conveniently practicable, such ships shall
frequently and regularly broadcast particulars of their position, route and speed.

[Source edition page 221]

GENEVA CONVENTION OF 1949 217
Resolution 8
The Conference wishes to affirm before all nations:
that, its work having been inspired solely by humanitarian aims, its earnest hope is that, in the
future, Governments may never have to apply the Geneva Conventions for the Protection of
War Victims;
that its strongest desire is that the Powers, great and small, may always reach a friendly settlement of their differences through cooperation and understanding between nations, so that
peace shall reign on earth for ever.
Resolution 9
Whereas Article 71 of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War
of August 12, 1949, provides that prisoners of war who have been without news for a long
period, or who are unable to receive news from their next of kin or to give them news by the
ordinary postal route, as well as those who are at a great distance from their home, shall be
permitted to send telegrams, the fees being charged against the prisoners of war’s account
with the Detaining Power or paid in the currency at their disposal, and that prisoners of war
shall likewise benefit by these facilities in cases of urgency; and
whereas to reduce the cost, often prohibitive, of such telegrams or cables, it appears necessary
that some method of grouping messages should be introduced whereby a series of short specimen messages concerning personal health, health of relatives at home, schooling, finance, etc.,
could be drawn up and numbered, for use by prisoners of war in the aforesaid circumstances,
the Conference, therefore, requests the International Committee of the Red Cross to prepare
a series of specimen messages covering these requirements and to submit them to the High
Contracting Parties for their approval.
Resolution 10
The Conference considers that the conditions under which a Party to a conflict can be recognized as a belligerent by Powers not taking part in this conflict, are governed by the general
rules of international law on the subject and are in no way modified by the Geneva Conventions.
Resolution 11
Whereas the Geneva Conventions require the International Committee of the Red Cross to
be ready at all times and in all circumstances to fulfil the humanitarian tasks entrusted to it
by these Conventions,
the Conference recognizes the necessity of providing regular financial support for the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

[Source edition page 223]

Mission
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
is an impartial, neutral and independent organization
whose exclusively humanitarian mission is to protect
the lives and dignity of victims of armed conflict and
other situations of violence and to provide them with
assistance. The ICRC also endeavours to prevent suffering
by promoting and strengthening humanitarian law and
universal humanitarian principles. Established in 1863,
the ICRC is at the origin of the Geneva Conventions and
the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement.
It directs and coordinates the international activities
conducted by the Movement in armed conflicts and other
situations of violence.
