ILIA NORMALIZED LEGAL TEXT

Document ID: icj-jurisdictional-immunities-2012
Title: Jurisdictional Immunities of the State (Germany v. Italy: Greece intervening) Judgment
Chinese title: 国家管辖豁免案判决
Issuing body: International Court of Justice
Official source: https://www.icj-cij.org/sites/default/files/case-related/143/143-20120203-JUD-01-00-EN.pdf
Database version: public-international-law-v1.0.1-normalized-2026.09.24

NOTICE
This is an ILIA-generated normalized text for offline legal research.
It is not an official edition. Source-edition page markers are retained
only as factual verification locators. Verify quotations against the
official source linked above.

========================================================================

[Source edition page 4]

99
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Paragraphs
Chronology of the Procedure 1-19
I. Historical and Factual Background 20-36
1. The Peace Treaty of 1947 22
2. The Federal Compensation Law of 1953 23
3. The 1961 Agreements 24-25
4. Law establishing the “Remembrance, Responsibility and
Future” Foundation 26
5. Proceedings before Italian courts 27-36
A. Cases involving Italian nationals 27-29
B. Cases involving Greek nationals 30-36
II. The Subject-Matter of the Dispute and the Jurisdiction of
the Court 37-51
III. Alleged Violation of Germany’s Jurisdictional Immunity
in the Proceedings Brought by the Italian Claimants 52-108
1. The issues before the Court 52-61
2. Italy’s first argument : the territorial tort principle 62-79
3. Italy’s second argument : the subject-matter and circumstances of the claims in the Italian courts 80-106
A. The gravity of the violations 81-91
B. The relationship between jus cogens and the rule of State
immunity 92-97
C. The “last resort” argument 98-104
D. The combined effect of the circumstances relied upon by
Italy 105-106
4. Conclusions 107-108
IV. The Measures of Constraint Taken against Property
Belonging to Germany Located on Italian Territory 109-120
V. The Decisions of the Italian Courts Declaring Enforceable in Italy Decisions of Greek Courts Upholding Civil
Claims against Germany 121-133
VI. Germany’s Final Submissions and the Remedies Sought 134-138
Operative Clause 139
4
6 CIJ1031.indb 5 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 5]

100
INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
YEAR 2012
2012
3 February
3 February 2012 General List
No. 143
JURISDICTIONAL IMMUNITIES
OF THE STATE
(GERMANY v. ITALY : GREECE intervening)
Historical and factual background.
Peace Treaty of 1947 — Federal Compensation Law of 1953 — 1961 Agree‑
ments — 2000 Federal Law establishing the “Remembrance, Responsibility and
Future” Foundation — Proceedings before Italian courts — Cases involving Ital‑
ian nationals — Cases involving Greek nationals.
*
Subject‑matter of dispute and jurisdiction of the Court.
Subject‑matter of dispute delimited by claims of Germany and Italy — No
objection to jurisdiction of the Court or admissibility of Application raised by
Italy — Article 1 of the European Convention for the Peaceful Settlement of Dis‑
putes as basis of jurisdiction — Limitation ratione temporis not applicable — The
Court has jurisdiction — The Court is not called upon to rule on questions of repa‑
ration — Relationship between duty of reparation and State immunity — No other
question with regard to the Court’s jurisdiction.
*
Alleged violation of Germany’s jurisdictional immunity in proceedings brought
by Italian claimants.
Issues before the Court — Origins of proceedings in Italian courts — Existence
of customary rule of international law conferring immunity on States — Sources
of State practice and opinio juris — State practice and opinio juris generally
recognize State immunity — Rule of State immunity derives from principle of sov‑
ereign equality of States — Need to distinguish between relevant acts of Germany
and those of Italy — Procedural nature of law of immunity — The Court must
examine and apply the law on State immunity as it existed at time of Italian pro‑
ceedings — Acta jure gestionis and acta jure imperii — Acts of armed forces of
5
6 CIJ1031.indb 7 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 6]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 101
German Reich were acta jure imperii — State immunity in respect of acta jure
imperii — Contention by Italy that Germany not entitled to immunity in respect of
cases before Italian courts.
Italy’s first argument : territorial tort principle — Acts committed on territory
of forum State by armed forces of a foreign State in conduct of armed conflict —
Article 11 of European Convention on State Immunity — Article 12 of United
Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property —
State practice : national legislation and judgments of national courts — State
immunity for acta jure imperii extends to civil proceedings for acts occasioning
death, personal injury or damage to property, committed by armed forces in con‑
duct of armed conflict — Opinio juris — Absence of contrary jurisprudence or
contrary statements by States — Decisions of Italian courts cannot be justified on
basis of territorial tort principle.
Italy’s second argument : subject‑matter and circumstances of claims in Italian
courts — Gravity of violations — Contention that international law does not
accord immunity to a State for serious violations of law of armed conflict —
National court is required to determine entitlement to immunity before it can hear
merits of case — No State practice to support proposition that a State is deprived
of immunity in cases of serious violations of international humanitarian law —
Neither has proposition been accepted by European Court of Human Rights —
State not deprived of immunity because it is accused of serious violations of inter‑
national humanitarian law.
Relationship between jus cogens and rule of State immunity — Alleged conflict
between jus cogens rules and immunity of Germany — No conflict exists between
jus cogens and immunity of a State — Argument about jus cogens displacing
State immunity has been rejected by national courts — State immunity not affected
by violation of jus cogens.
The “last resort” argument — Contention that Italian courts were justified in
denying Germany immunity because of failure of all other attempts to secure com‑
pensation — State immunity not dependent upon existence of effective alternative
means of redress — Italy’s argument rejected — Further negotiation between Ger‑
many and Italy.
Combined effect of circumstances relied upon by Italy — None of three strands
justify action of Italian courts — No effect if taken together — State practice —
Balancing different factors would disregard nature of State immunity — Immunity
cannot be dependent upon outcome of balancing exercise by national court.
Action of Italian courts in denying Germany immunity constitutes a breach of
obligations owed by Italy to Germany — No need to consider other questions
raised by the Parties.
*
Measures of constraint taken against property belonging to Germany located on
Italian territory.
6
6 CIJ1031.indb 9 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 7]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 102
Legal charge against Villa Vigoni — Charge in question suspended by Italy to
take account of proceedings before the Court — Distinction between rules of cus‑
tomary international law governing immunity from enforcement and those govern‑
ing jurisdictional immunity — No need to determine whether decisions of Greek
courts awarding pecuniary damages against Germany were in breach of that
State’s jurisdictional immunity — Article 19 of United Nations Convention on
Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property — Property which was
subject of measure of constraint being used for non‑commercial governmental pur‑
poses — Germany not having expressly consented to taking of legal charge in
question or allocated Villa Vigoni for satisfaction of judicial claims against it —
Registration of legal charge on Villa Vigoni constitutes a violation by Italy of its
obligation to respect immunity owed to Germany.
*
Decisions of Italian courts declaring enforceable in Italy decisions of Greek
courts upholding civil claims against Germany.
Germany’s contention that its jurisdictional immunity was violated by these
decisions — Request for exequatur — Whether Italian courts respected Germa‑
ny’s immunity from jurisdiction in upholding request for exequatur — Purpose of
exequatur proceedings — Exequatur proceedings must be regarded as being
directed against State which was subject of foreign judgment — Question of immu‑
nity precedes consideration of request for exequatur — No need to rule on ques‑
tion whether Greek courts violated Germany’s immunity — Decisions of Florence
Court of Appeal constitute violation by Italy of its obligation to respect jurisdic‑
tional immunity of Germany.
*
Germany’s final submissions and the remedies sought.
Germany’s six requests presented to the Court — First three submissions
upheld — Violation by Italy of Germany’s jurisdictional immunity — Fourth sub‑
mission — Request for declaration that Italy’s international responsibility is
engaged — No need for express declaration — Responsibility automatically
inferred from finding that certain obligations have been violated — Fourth submis‑
sion not upheld — Fifth submission — Request that Italy be ordered to take, by
means of its own choosing, any and all steps to ensure that all decisions of its
courts and other judicial authorities infringing Germany’s sovereign immunity
cease to have effect — Fifth submission upheld — Result to be achieved by enact‑
ing appropriate legislation or by other methods having the same effect — Sixth
submission — Request that Italy be ordered to provide assurances of non‑repeti‑
tion — No reason to suppose that a State whose conduct has been declared wrong‑
ful by the Court will repeat that conduct in future — No circumstances justifying
assurances of non‑repetition — Sixth submission not upheld.
7
6 CIJ1031.indb 11 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 8]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 103
JUDGMENT
Present : President Owada ; Vice‑President Tomka ; Judges Koroma, Simma,
Abraham, Keith, Sepúlveda-Amor, Bennouna, Skotnikov, Cançado
Trindade, Yusuf, Greenwood, Xue, Donoghue ; Judge ad hoc
Gaja ; Registrar Couvreur.
In the case concerning jurisdictional immunities of the State,
between
the Federal Republic of Germany,
represented by
H.E. Ms Susanne Wasum-Rainer, Ambassador, Director-General for Legal
Affairs and Legal Adviser, Federal Foreign Office,
H.E. Mr. Heinz-Peter Behr, Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany to the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
Mr. Christian Tomuschat, former Member and Chairman of the International Law Commission, Professor emeritus of Public International Law at
the Humboldt University of Berlin,
as Agents ;
Mr. Andrea Gattini, Professor of Public International Law at the University
of Padua,
Mr. Robert Kolb, Professor of Public International Law at the University of
Geneva,
as Counsel and Advocates ;
Mr. Guido Hildner, Head of the Public International Law Division, Federal
Foreign Office,
Mr. Götz Schmidt-Bremme, Head of the International Civil, Trade and Tax
Law Division, Federal Foreign Office,
Mr. Felix Neumann, Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany in the
Kingdom of the Netherlands,
Mr. Gregor Schotten, Federal Foreign Office,
Mr. Klaus Keller, Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany in the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
Ms Susanne Achilles, Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany in the
Kingdom of the Netherlands,
Ms Donate Arz von Straussenburg, Embassy of the Federal Republic of Germany in the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
as Advisers ;
Ms Fiona Kaltenborn,
as Assistant,
and
the Italian Republic,
represented by
H.E. Mr. Paolo Pucci di Benisichi, Ambassador and State Counsellor,
8
6 CIJ1031.indb 13 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 9]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 104
as Agent ;
Mr. Giacomo Aiello, State Advocate,
H.E. Mr. Franco Giordano, Ambassador of the Italian Republic to the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
as Co-Agents ;
Mr. Luigi Condorelli, Professor of International Law, University of Florence,
Mr. Pierre-Marie Dupuy, Professor of International Law, Graduate Institute
of International and Development Studies, Geneva, and University of
Paris II (Panthéon-Assas),
Mr. Paolo Palchetti, Associate Professor of International Law, University of
Macerata,
Mr. Salvatore Zappalà, Professor of International Law, University of
Catania, Legal Adviser, Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations,
as Counsel and Advocates ;
Mr. Giorgio Marrapodi, Minister Plenipotentiary, Head of the Service for
Legal Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Guido Cerboni, Minister Plenipotentiary, Co-ordinator for the countries
of Central and Western Europe, Directorate-General for the European
Union, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Roberto Bellelli, Legal Adviser, Embassy of Italy in the Kingdom of the
Netherlands,
Ms Sarah Negro, First Secretary, Embassy of Italy in the Kingdom of the
Netherlands,
Mr. Mel Marquis, Professor of Law, European University Institute, Florence,
Ms Francesca De Vittor, International Law Researcher, University of Macerata,
as Advisers,
with, as State permitted to intervene in the case,
the Hellenic Republic,
represented by
Mr. Stelios Perrakis, Professor of International and European Institutions,
Panteion University of Athens,
as Agent ;
H.E. Mr. Ioannis Economides, Ambassador of the Hellenic Republic to the
Kingdom of the Netherlands,
as Deputy-Agent ;
Mr. Antonis Bredimas, Professor of International Law, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens,
as Counsel and Advocate ;
Ms Maria-Daniella Marouda, Lecturer in International Law, Panteion University of Athens,
as Counsel,
9
6 CIJ1031.indb 15 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 10]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 105
The Court,
composed as above,
after deliberation,
delivers the following Judgment :
1. On 23 December 2008, the Federal Republic of Germany (hereinafter
“Germany”) filed in the Registry of the Court an Application instituting proceedings against the Italian Republic (hereinafter “Italy”) in respect of a dispute
originating in “violations of obligations under international law” allegedly committed by Italy through its judicial practice “in that it has failed to respect the
jurisdictional immunity which . . . Germany enjoys under international law”.
As a basis for the jurisdiction of the Court, Germany, in its Application,
invoked Article 1 of the European Convention for the Peaceful Settlement of
Disputes of 29 April 1957.
2. Under Article 40, paragraph 2, of the Statute, the Registrar immediately
communicated the Application to the Government of Italy ; and, pursuant to
paragraph 3 of that Article, all other States entitled to appear before the Court
were notified of the Application.
3. Since the Court included upon the Bench no judge of Italian nationality,
Italy exercised its right under Article 31, paragraph 2, of the Statute to choose a
judge ad hoc to sit in the case : it chose Mr. Giorgio Gaja.
4. By an Order of 29 April 2009, the Court fixed 23 June 2009 as the time-limit
for the filing of the Memorial of Germany and 23 December 2009 as the
time-limit for the filing of the Counter-Memorial of Italy ; those pleadings were
duly filed within the time-limits so prescribed. The Counter-Memorial of Italy
included a counter-claim “with respect to the question of the reparation owed to
Italian victims of grave violations of international humanitarian law committed
by forces of the German Reich”.
5. By an Order of 6 July 2010, the Court decided that the counter-claim presented by Italy was inadmissible as such under Article 80, paragraph 1, of the
Rules of Court. By the same Order, the Court authorized Germany to submit a
Reply and Italy to submit a Rejoinder, and fixed 14 October 2010 and 14 January 2011 respectively as the time-limits for the filing of those pleadings ; those
pleadings were duly filed within the time-limits so prescribed.
6. On 13 January 2011, the Hellenic Republic (hereinafter “Greece”) filed in
the Registry an Application for permission to intervene in the case pursuant to
Article 62 of the Statute. In its Application, Greece indicated that it “[did] not
seek to become a party to the case”.
7. In accordance with Article 83, paragraph 1, of the Rules of Court, the
Registrar, by letters dated 13 January 2011, transmitted certified copies of the
Application for permission to intervene to the Government of Germany and the
Government of Italy, which were informed that the Court had fixed 1 April 2011
as the time-limit for the submission of their written observations on that Application. The Registrar also transmitted, under paragraph 2 of the same Article, a
copy of the Application to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
8. Germany and Italy each submitted written observations on Greece’s
Application for permission to intervene within the time-limit thus fixed. The
10
6 CIJ1031.indb 17 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 11]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 106
Registry transmitted to each Party a copy of the other’s observations, and copies of the observations of both Parties to Greece.
9. In light of Article 84, paragraph 2, of the Rules of Court, and taking into
account the fact that neither Party filed an objection, the Court decided that it
was not necessary to hold hearings on the question whether Greece’s Application for permission to intervene should be granted. The Court nevertheless
decided that Greece should be given an opportunity to comment on the observations of the Parties and that the latter should be allowed to submit additional
written observations on the question. The Court fixed 6 May 2011 as the
time-limit for the submission by Greece of its own written observations on those
of the Parties, and 6 June 2011 as the time-limit for the submission by the Parties of additional observations on Greece’s written observations. The observations of Greece and the additional observations of the Parties were submitted
within the time-limits thus fixed. The Registry duly transmitted to the Parties a
copy of the observations of Greece ; it transmitted to each of the Parties a copy
of the other’s additional observations and to Greece copies of the additional
observations of both Parties.
10. By an Order of 4 July 2011, the Court authorized Greece to intervene in the
case as a non-party, in so far as this intervention was limited to the decisions of
Greek courts which were declared by Italian courts as enforceable in Italy. The
Court further fixed the following time-limits for the filing of the written statement
and the written observations referred to in Article 85, paragraph 1, of the Rules of
Court : 5 August 2011 for the written statement of Greece and 5 September 2011
for the written observations of Germany and Italy on that statement.
11. The written statement of Greece and the written observations of Germany
were duly filed within the time-limits so fixed. By a letter dated 1 September 2011,
the Agent of Italy indicated that the Italian Republic would not be presenting
observations on the written statement of Greece at that stage of the proceedings,
but reserved “its position and right to address certain points raised in the written
statement, as necessary, in the course of the oral proceedings”. The Registry duly
transmitted to the Parties a copy of the written statement of Greece ; it transmitted to Italy and Greece a copy of the written observations of Germany.
12. Under Article 53, paragraph 2, of its Rules, the Court, after ascertaining
the views of the Parties, decided that copies of the pleadings and documents
annexed would be made available to the public at the opening of the oral proceedings. After consulting the Parties and Greece, the Court decided that the
same should apply to the written statement of the intervening State and the
written observations of Germany on that statement.
13. Public hearings were held from 12 to 16 September 2011, at which the
Court heard the oral arguments and replies of :
For Germany : M s Susanne Wasum-Rainer,
Mr. Christian Tomuschat,
Mr. Andrea Gattini,
Mr. Robert Kolb.
For Italy : Mr. Giacomo Aiello,
Mr. Luigi Condorelli,
Mr. Salvatore Zappalà,
Mr. Paolo Palchetti,
Mr. Pierre-Marie Dupuy.
For Greece : Mr. Stelios Perrakis,
Mr. Antonis Bredimas.
11
6 CIJ1031.indb 19 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 12]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 107
14. At the hearings, questions were put by Members of the Court to the Parties and to Greece, as intervening State, to which replies were given in writing.
The Parties submitted written comments on those written replies.
*
15. In its Application, Germany made the following requests :
“Germany prays the Court to adjudge and declare that the Italian Republic :
(1) by allowing civil claims based on violations of international humanitarian law by the German Reich during World War II from September
1943 to May 1945, to be brought against the Federal Republic of Germany, committed violations of obligations under international law in
that it has failed to respect the jurisdictional immunity which the Federal Republic of Germany enjoys under international law ;
(2) by taking measures of constraint against ‘Villa Vigoni’, German State
property used for government non-commercial purposes, also committed violations of Germany’s jurisdictional immunity ;
(3) by declaring Greek judgments based on occurrences similar to those
defined above in request No. 1 enforceable in Italy, committed a further
breach of Germany’s jurisdictional immunity.
Accordingly, the Federal Republic of Germany prays the Court to
adjudge and declare that
(4) the Italian Republic’s international responsibility is engaged ;
(5) the Italian Republic must, by means of its own choosing, take any and
all steps to ensure that all the decisions of its courts and other judicial
authorities infringing Germany’s sovereign immunity become unenforceable ;
(6) the Italian Republic must take any and all steps to ensure that in the
future Italian courts do not entertain legal actions against Germany
founded on the occurrences described in request No. 1 above.”
16. In the course of the written proceedings the following submissions were
presented by the Parties :
On behalf of the Government of Germany,
in the Memorial and in the Reply :
“Germany prays the Court to adjudge and declare that the Italian Republic :
(1) by allowing civil claims based on violations of international humanitarian law by the German Reich during World War II from September
1943 to May 1945, to be brought against the Federal Republic of Germany, committed violations of obligations under international law in
that it has failed to respect the jurisdictional immunity which the Federal Republic of Germany enjoys under international law ;
12
6 CIJ1031.indb 21 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 13]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 108
(2) by taking measures of constraint against ‘Villa Vigoni’, German State
property used for government non-commercial purposes, also committed violations of Germany’s jurisdictional immunity ;
(3) by declaring Greek judgments based on occurrences similar to those
defined above in request No. 1 enforceable in Italy, committed a further
breach of Germany’s jurisdictional immunity.
Accordingly, the Federal Republic of Germany prays the Court to adjudge
and declare that
(4) the Italian Republic’s international responsibility is engaged ;
(5) the Italian Republic must, by means of its own choosing, take any and
all steps to ensure that all the decisions of its courts and other judicial
authorities infringing Germany’s sovereign immunity become unenforceable ;
(6) the Italian Republic must take any and all steps to ensure that in the
future Italian courts do not entertain legal actions against Germany
founded on the occurrences described in request No. 1 above.”
On behalf of the Government of Italy,
in the Counter-Memorial and in the Rejoinder :
“On the basis of the facts and arguments set out [in Italy’s Counter-
Memorial and Rejoinder], and reserving its right to supplement or amend
these Submissions, Italy respectfully requests that the Court adjudge and
declare that all the claims of Germany are rejected.”
17. At the oral proceedings, the following submissions were presented by the
Parties :
On behalf of the Government of Germany,
“Germany respectfully requests the Court to adjudge and declare that
the Italian Republic :
(1) by allowing civil claims based on violations of international humanitarian law by the German Reich during World War II between September 1943 and May 1945 to be brought against the Federal Republic of
Germany, committed violations of obligations under international law
in that it has failed to respect the jurisdictional immunity which the
Federal Republic of Germany enjoys under international law ;
(2) by taking measures of constraint against ‘Villa Vigoni’, German State
property used for government non-commercial purposes, also committed violations of Germany’s jurisdictional immunity ;
(3) by declaring Greek judgments based on occurrences similar to those
defined above in request No. 1 enforceable in Italy, committed a further
breach of Germany’s jurisdictional immunity.
Accordingly, the Federal Republic of Germany respectfully requests the
Court to adjudge and declare that :
13
6 CIJ1031.indb 23 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 14]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 109
(4) the Italian Republic’s international responsibility is engaged ;
(5) the Italian Republic must, by means of its own choosing, take any and
all steps to ensure that all the decisions of its courts and other judicial
authorities infringing Germany’s sovereign immunity become unenforceable ; and
(6) the Italian Republic must take any and all steps to ensure that in the
future Italian courts do not entertain legal actions against Germany
founded on the occurrences described in request No. 1 above.”
On behalf of the Government of Italy,
“[F]or the reasons given in [its] written and oral pleadings, [Italy requests]
that the Court adjudge and hold the claims of the Applicant to be unfounded. This request is subject to the qualification that . . . Italy has no objection to any decision by the Court obliging Italy to ensure that the mortgage
on Villa Vigoni inscribed at the land registry is cancelled.”
*
18. At the end of the written statement submitted by it in accordance with
Article 85, paragraph 1, of the Rules of Court, Greece stated inter alia
“that the effect of the judgment that the ICJ will hand down in this case
concerning the jurisdictional immunity of the State will be of major importance to the Italian legal order and certainly to the Greek legal order.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Further, an ICJ decision on the effects of the principle of jurisdictional
immunity of States when faced with a jus cogens rule of international
law — such as the prohibition on violation of fundamental rules of humanitarian law — will guide the Greek courts in this regard. It will thus have
a significant effect on pending and potential lawsuits brought by individuals before those courts.”
19. At the end of the oral observations submitted by it with respect to the
subject-matter of the intervention in accordance with Article 85, paragraph 3, of
the Rules of Court, Greece stated inter alia :
“A decision of the International Court of Justice on the effects of the
principle of jurisdictional immunity of States when faced with a jus cogens
rule of international law — such as the prohibition on violation of fundamental rules of humanitarian law — will guide the Greek courts . . . It will
thus have a significant effect on pending and potential lawsuits brought by
individuals before those courts.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Greek Government considers that the effect of the judgment that
[the] Court will hand down in this case concerning jurisdictional immunity
will be of major importance, primarily to the Italian legal order and certainly to the Greek legal order.”
*
* *
14
6 CIJ1031.indb 25 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 15]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 110
I. Historical and Factual Background
20. The Court finds it useful at the outset to describe briefly the historical and factual background of the case which is largely uncontested
between the Parties.
21. In June 1940, Italy entered the Second World War as an ally of the
German Reich. In September 1943, following the removal of Mussolini
from power, Italy surrendered to the Allies and, the following month,
declared war on Germany. German forces, however, occupied much of
Italian territory and, between October 1943 and the end of the War, perpetrated many atrocities against the population of that territory, including massacres of civilians and the deportation of large numbers of civilians
for use as forced labour. In addition, German forces took prisoner, both
inside Italy and elsewhere in Europe, several hundred thousand members
of the Italian armed forces. Most of these prisoners (hereinafter the “Italian military internees”) were denied the status of prisoner of war and
deported to Germany and German-occupied territories for use as forced
labour.
1. The Peace Treaty of 1947
22. On 10 February 1947, in the aftermath of the Second World War,
the Allied Powers concluded a Peace Treaty with Italy, regulating, in particular, the legal and economic consequences of the war with Italy. Article 77 of the Peace Treaty reads as follows :
“1. From the coming into force of the present Treaty property in
Germany of Italy and of Italian nationals shall no longer be treated
as enemy property and all restrictions based on such treatment shall
be removed.
2. Identifiable property of Italy and of Italian nationals removed
by force or duress from Italian territory to Germany by German
forces or authorities after September 3, 1943, shall be eligible for restitution.
3. The restoration and restitution of Italian property in Germany
shall be effected in accordance with measures which will be determined by the Powers in occupation of Germany.
4. Without prejudice to these and to any other dispositions in
favour of Italy and Italian nationals by the Powers occupying
Germany, Italy waives on its own behalf and on behalf of Italian
nationals all claims against Germany and German nationals outstanding on May 8, 1945, except those arising out of contracts and
other obligations entered into, and rights acquired, before September 1, 1939. This waiver shall be deemed to include debts, all intergovernmental claims in respect of arrangements entered into in the
15
6 CIJ1031.indb 27 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 16]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 111
course of the war, and all claims for loss or damage arising during
the war.”
2. The Federal Compensation Law of 1953
23. In 1953, the Federal Republic of Germany adopted the Federal
Compensation Law concerning Victims of National Socialist Persecution
(Bundesentschädigungsgesetz (BEG)) in order to compensate certain categories of victims of Nazi persecution. Many claims by Italian nationals
under the Federal Compensation Law were unsuccessful, either because
the claimants were not considered victims of national Socialist persecution within the definition of the Federal Compensation Law, or because
they had no domicile or permanent residence in Germany, as required by
that Law. The Federal Compensation Law was amended in 1965 to cover
claims by persons persecuted because of their nationality or their membership in a non-German ethnic group, while requiring that the persons
in question had refugee status on 1 October 1953. Even after the Law was
amended in 1965, many Italian claimants still did not qualify for compensation because they did not have refugee status on 1 October 1953.
Because of the specific terms of the Federal Compensation Law as originally adopted and as amended in 1965, claims brought by victims having
foreign nationality were generally dismissed by the German courts.
3. The 1961 Agreements
24. On 2 June 1961, two Agreements were concluded between the Federal Republic of Germany and Italy. The first Agreement, which entered
into force on 16 September 1963, concerned the “settlement of certain
property-related, economic and financial questions”. Under Article 1 of
that Agreement, Germany paid compensation to Italy for “outstanding
questions of an economic nature”. Article 2 of the Agreement provided as
follows :
“(1) The Italian Government declares all outstanding claims on the part
of the Italian Republic or Italian natural or legal persons against
the Federal Republic of Germany or German natural or legal persons to be settled to the extent that they are based on rights and
circumstances which arose during the period from 1 September 1939
to 8 May 1945.
(2) The Italian Government shall indemnify the Federal Republic of
Germany and German natural or legal persons for any possible
judicial proceedings or other legal action by Italian natural or
legal persons in relation to the above-mentioned claims.”
16
6 CIJ1031.indb 29 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 17]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 112
25. The second Agreement, which entered into force on 31 July 1963,
concerned “compensation for Italian nationals subjected to National-
Socialist measures of persecution”. By virtue of this Agreement, the Federal Republic of Germany undertook to pay compensation to Italian
nationals affected by those measures. Under Article 1 of that Agreement,
Germany agreed to pay Italy forty million Deutsche marks
“for the benefit of Italian nationals who, on grounds of their race,
faith or ideology were subjected to National-Socialist measures of
persecution and who, as a result of those persecution measures, suffered loss of liberty or damage to their health, and for the benefit of
the dependents of those who died in consequence of such measures”.
Article 3 of that Agreement provided as follows :
“Without prejudice to any rights of Italian nationals based on
German compensation legislation, the payment provided for in
Article 1 shall constitute final settlement between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Italian Republic of all questions governed
by the present Treaty.”
4. Law Establishing the “Remembrance, Responsibility
and Future” Foundation
26. On 2 August 2000, a federal law was adopted in Germany, establishing a “Remembrance, Responsibility and Future” Foundation (hereinafter the “2000 Federal Law”) to make funds available to individuals
who had been subjected to forced labour and “other injustices from the
National Socialist period” (Sec. 2, para. 1). The Foundation did not provide money directly to eligible individuals under the 2000 Federal Law
but instead to “partner organizations”, including the International Organization for Migration in Geneva. Article 11 of the 2000 Federal Law
placed certain limits on entitlement to compensation. One effect of this
provision was to exclude from the right to compensation those who had
had the status of prisoner of war, unless they had been detained in concentration camps or came within other specified categories. The reason
given in the official commentary to this provision, which accompanied the
draft law, was that prisoners of war “may, according to the rules of international law, be put to work by the detaining power” [translation by the
Registry] (Bundestagsdrucksache 14/3206, 13 April 2000).
Thousands of former Italian military internees, who, as noted above,
had been denied the status of prisoner of war by the German Reich (see
paragraph 21), applied for compensation under the 2000 Federal Law. In
2001, the German authorities took the view that, under the rules of inter-
17
6 CIJ1031.indb 31 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 18]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 113
national law, the German Reich had not been able unilaterally to change
the status of the Italian military internees from prisoners of war to that of
civilian workers. Therefore, according to the German authorities, the
Italian military internees had never lost their prisoner-of-war status, with
the result that they were excluded from the benefits provided under the
2000 Federal Law. On this basis, an overwhelming majority of requests
for compensation lodged by Italian military internees was rejected.
Attempts by former Italian military internees to challenge that decision
and seek redress in the German courts were unsuccessful. In a number of
decisions, German courts ruled that the individuals in question were not
entitled to compensation under the 2000 Federal Law because they had
been prisoners of war. On 28 June 2004, a Chamber of the German Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht) held that Article 11, paragraph 3, of the 2000 Federal Law, which excluded reparation for prisoners
of war, did not violate the right to equality before the law guaranteed by
the German Constitution, and that public international law did not establish an individual right to compensation for forced labour.
A group of former Italian military internees filed an application against
Germany before the European Court of Human Rights on 20 December 2004. On 4 September 2007, a Chamber of that Court declared that
the application was “incompatible ratione materiae” with the provisions
of the Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms and its protocols and therefore was declared inadmissible
(Associazione Nazionale Reduci and 275 Others v. Germany, decision of
4 September 2007, application No. 45563/04).
5. Proceedings before Italian Courts
A. Cases involving Italian nationals
27. On 23 September 1998, Mr. Luigi Ferrini, an Italian national who
had been arrested in August 1944 and deported to Germany, where he
was detained and forced to work in a munitions factory until the end of
the war, instituted proceedings against the Federal Republic of Germany
in the Court of Arezzo (Tribunale di Arezzo) in Italy. On 3 November 2000, the Court of Arezzo decided that Mr. Luigi Ferrini’s claim was
inadmissible because Germany, as a sovereign State, was protected by
jurisdictional immunity. By a judgment of 16 November 2001, registered
on 14 January 2002, the Court of Appeal of Florence (Corte di Appello di
Firenze) dismissed the appeal of the claimant on the same grounds. On
11 March 2004, the Italian Court of Cassation (Corte di Cassazione) held
that Italian courts had jurisdiction over the claims for compensation
brought against Germany by Mr. Luigi Ferrini on the ground that immunity does not apply in circumstances in which the act complained of constitutes an international crime (Ferrini v. Federal Republic of Germany,
decision No. 5044/2004 (Rivista di diritto internazionale, Vol. 87, 2004,
p. 539 ; International Law Reports (ILR), Vol. 128, p. 658)). The case was
18
6 CIJ1031.indb 33 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 19]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 114
then referred back to the Court of Arezzo, which held in a judgment
dated 12 April 2007 that, although it had jurisdiction to entertain the
case, the claim to reparation was time-barred. The judgment of the Court
of Arezzo was reversed on appeal by the Court of Appeal of Florence,
which held in a judgment dated 17 February 2011 that Germany should
pay damages to Mr. Luigi Ferrini as well as his case-related legal costs
incurred in the course of the judicial proceedings in Italy. In particular,
the Court of Appeal of Florence held that jurisdictional immunity is not
absolute and cannot be invoked by a State in the face of acts by that State
which constitute crimes under international law.
28. Following the Ferrini judgment of the Italian Court of Cassation
dated 11 March 2004, twelve claimants brought proceedings against Germany in the Court of Turin (Tribunale di Torino) on 13 April 2004 in the
case concerning Giovanni Mantelli and Others. On 28 April 2004, Liberato Maietta filed a case against Germany before the Court of Sciacca
(Tribunale di Sciacca). In both cases, which relate to acts of deportation
to, and forced labour in, Germany which took place between 1943 and
1945, an interlocutory appeal requesting a declaration of lack of jurisdiction (“regolamento preventivo di giurisdizione”) was filed by Germany
before the Italian Court of Cassation. By two orders of 29 May 2008
issued in the Giovanni Mantelli and Others and the Liberato Maietta cases
(order No. 14201 (Mantelli), Foro italiano, Vol. 134, 2009, I, p. 1568 ;
order No. 14209 (Maietta), Rivista di diritto internazionale, Vol. 91, 2008,
p. 896), the Italian Court of Cassation confirmed that the Italian courts
had jurisdiction over the claims against Germany. A number of similar
claims against Germany are currently pending before Italian courts.
29. The Italian Court of Cassation also confirmed the reasoning of the
Ferrini judgment in a different context in proceedings brought against
Mr. Max Josef Milde, a member of the “Hermann Göring” division of
the German armed forces, who was charged with participation in massacres committed on 29 June 1944 in Civitella (Val di Chiana), Cornia and
San Pancrazio in Italy. The Military Court of La Spezia (Tribunale Mili‑
tare di La Spezia) sentenced Mr. Milde in absentia to life imprisonment
and ordered Mr. Milde and Germany, jointly and severally, to pay reparation to the successors in title of the victims of the massacre who
appeared as civil parties in the proceedings (judgment of 10 October 2006
(registered on 2 February 2007)). Germany appealed to the Military
Court of Appeals in Rome (Corte Militare di Appello di Roma) against
that part of the decision, which condemned it. On 18 December 2007 the
Military Court of Appeals dismissed the appeal. In a judgment of
21 October 2008 (registered on 13 January 2009), the Italian Court of
Cassation rejected Germany’s argument of lack of jurisdiction and confirmed its reasoning in the Ferrini judgment that in cases of crimes under
international law, the jurisdictional immunity of States should be set
aside (Rivista di diritto internazionale, Vol. 92, 2009, p. 618).
19
6 CIJ1031.indb 35 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 20]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 115
B. Cases involving Greek nationals
30. On 10 June 1944, during the German occupation of Greece, German armed forces committed a massacre in the Greek village of Distomo,
involving many civilians. In 1995, relatives of the victims of the massacre
who claimed compensation for loss of life and property commenced proceedings against Germany. The Greek Court of First Instance (Proto‑
dikeio) of Livadia rendered a judgment in default on 25 September 1997
(and read out in court on 30 October 1997) against Germany and awarded
damages to the successors in title of the victims of the massacre. Germany’s appeal of that judgment was dismissed by the Hellenic Supreme
Court (Areios Pagos) on 4 May 2000 (Prefecture of Voiotia v. Federal
Republic of Germany, case No. 11/2000 (ILR, Vol. 129, p. 513) (the Dis‑
tomo case)). Article 923 of the Greek Code of Civil Procedure requires
authorization from the Minister for Justice to enforce a judgment against
a foreign State in Greece. That authorization was requested by the claimants in the Distomo case but was not granted. As a result, the judgments
against Germany have remained unexecuted in Greece.
31. The claimants in the Distomo case brought proceedings against
Greece and Germany before the European Court of Human Rights alleging that Germany and Greece had violated Article 6, paragraph 1, of the
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to that Convention by refusing to
comply with the decision of the Court of First Instance of Livadia dated
25 September 1997 (as to Germany) and failing to permit execution of
that decision (as to Greece). In its decision of 12 December 2002, the
European Court of Human Rights, referring to the rule of State immunity, held that the claimants’ application was inadmissible (Kalogeropou‑
lou and Others v. Greece and Germany, application No. 59021/00, decision
of 12 December 2002, ECHR Reports 2002-X, p. 417 ; ILR, Vol. 129,
p. 537).
32. The Greek claimants brought proceedings before the German
courts in order to enforce in Germany the judgment rendered on 25 September 1997 by the Greek Court of First Instance of Livadia, as confirmed on 4 May 2000 by the Hellenic Supreme Court. In its judgment of
26 June 2003, the German Federal Supreme Court (Bundesgerichtshof)
held that those Greek judicial decisions could not be recognized within
the German legal order because they had been given in breach of Germany’s entitlement to State immunity (Greek Citizens v. Federal Republic
of Germany, case No. III ZR 245/98, Neue Juristische Wochenschrift
(NJW), 2003, p. 3488 ; ILR, Vol. 129, p. 556).
33. The Greek claimants then sought to enforce the judgments of the
Greek courts in the Distomo case in Italy. The Court of Appeal of Florence held in a decision dated 2 May 2005 (registered on 5 May 2005)
that the order contained in the judgment of the Hellenic Supreme Court,
20
6 CIJ1031.indb 37 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 21]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 116
imposing an obligation on Germany to reimburse the legal expenses for
the judicial proceedings before that Court, was enforceable in Italy. In a
decision dated 6 February 2007 (registered on 22 March 2007), the Court
of Appeal of Florence rejected the objection raised by Germany against
the decision of 2 May 2005 (Foro italiano, Vol. 133, 2008, I, p. 1308).
The Italian Court of Cassation, in a judgment dated 6 May 2008
(registered on 29 May 2008), confirmed the ruling of the Court of
Appeal of Florence (Rivista di diritto internazionale, Vol. 92, 2009,
p. 594).
34. Concerning the question of reparations to be paid to Greek claimants by Germany, the Court of Appeal of Florence declared, by a decision
dated 13 June 2006 (registered on 16 June 2006), that the judgment of the
Court of First Instance of Livadia dated 25 September 1997 was enforceable in Italy. In a judgment dated 21 October 2008 (registered on 25 November 2008), the Court of Appeal of Florence rejected the objection by the
German Government against the decision of 13 June 2006. The Italian
Court of Cassation, in a judgment dated 12 January 2011 (registered on
20 May 2011), confirmed the ruling of the Court of Appeal of Florence.
35. On 7 June 2007, the Greek claimants, pursuant to the decision by
the Court of Appeal of Florence of 13 June 2006, registered with the Como
provincial office of the Italian Land Registry (Agenzia del Territorio) a
legal charge (ipoteca giudiziale) over Villa Vigoni, a property of the German State near Lake Como. The State Legal Service for the District of
Milan (Avvocatura Distrettuale dello Stato di Milano), in a submission
dated 6 June 2008 and made before the Court of Como (Tribunale di
Como), maintained that the charge should be cancelled. Under Decree-Law
No. 63 of 28 April 2010, Law No. 98 of 23 June 2010 and Decree-Law
No. 216 of 29 December 2011, the legal charge was suspended pending the
decision of the International Court of Justice in the present case.
36. Following the institution of proceedings in the Distomo case in
1995, another case was brought against Germany by Greek nationals
before Greek courts — referred to as the Margellos case — involving
claims for compensation for acts committed by German forces in the
Greek village of Lidoriki in 1944. In 2001, the Hellenic Supreme Court
referred that case to the Special Supreme Court (Anotato Eidiko
Dikastirio), which, in accordance with Article 100 of the Constitution of
Greece, has jurisdiction in relation to “the settlement of controversies
regarding the determination of generally recognized rules of international
law” [translation by the Registry], requesting it to decide whether the
rules on State immunity covered acts referred to in the Margellos case. By
a decision of 17 September 2002, the Special Supreme Court found that,
in the present state of development of international law, Germany was
entitled to State immunity (Margellos v. Federal Republic of Germany,
case No. 6/2002, ILR, Vol. 129, p. 525).
21
6 CIJ1031.indb 39 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 22]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 117
II. The Subject-Matter of the Dispute
and the Jurisdiction of the Court
37. The submissions presented to the Court by Germany have remained
unchanged throughout the proceedings (see paragraphs 15, 16 and 17 above).
Germany requests the Court, in substance, to find that Italy has failed
to respect the jurisdictional immunity which Germany enjoys under international law by allowing civil claims to be brought against it in the Italian
courts, seeking reparation for injuries caused by violations of international humanitarian law committed by the German Reich during the Second World War ; that Italy has also violated Germany’s immunity by
taking measures of constraint against Villa Vigoni, German State property situated in Italian territory ; and that it has further breached Germany’s jurisdictional immunity by declaring enforceable in Italy decisions
of Greek civil courts rendered against Germany on the basis of acts similar to those which gave rise to the claims brought before Italian courts.
Consequently, the Applicant requests the Court to declare that Italy’s
international responsibility is engaged and to order the Respondent to
take various steps by way of reparation.
38. Italy, for its part, requests the Court to adjudge Germany’s claims
to be unfounded and therefore to reject them, apart from the submission
regarding the measures of constraint taken against Villa Vigoni, on which
point the Respondent indicates to the Court that it would have no objection to the latter ordering it to bring the said measures to an end.
In its Counter-Memorial, Italy submitted a counter-claim “with respect
to the question of the reparation owed to Italian victims of grave violations of international humanitarian law committed by forces of the German Reich” ; this claim was dismissed by the Court’s Order of 6 July 2010,
on the grounds that it did not fall within the jurisdiction of the Court and
was consequently inadmissible under Article 80, paragraph 1, of the Rules
of Court (see paragraph 5 above).
*
39. The subject-matter of a dispute brought before the Court is delimited by the claims submitted to it by the parties. In the present case, since
there is no longer any counter-claim before the Court and Italy has
requested the Court to “adjudge Germany’s claims to be unfounded”, it
is those claims that delimit the subject-matter of the dispute which the
Court is called upon to settle. It is in respect of those claims that the
Court must determine whether it has jurisdiction to entertain the case.
40. Italy has raised no objection of any kind regarding the jurisdiction
of the Court or the admissibility of the Application.
22
6 CIJ1031.indb 41 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 23]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 118
Nevertheless, according to well-established jurisprudence, the Court
“must . . . always be satisfied that it has jurisdiction, and must if necessary go into the matter proprio motu” (Appeal relating to the Jurisdiction
of the ICAO Council (India v. Pakistan), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1972,
p. 52, para. 13).
41. Germany’s Application was filed on the basis of the jurisdiction
conferred on the Court by Article 1 of the European Convention for the
Peaceful Settlement of Disputes, under the terms of which :
“The High Contracting Parties shall submit to the judgement of
the International Court of Justice all international legal disputes
which may arise between them including, in particular, those concerning :
(a) the interpretation of a treaty ;
(b) any question of international law ;
(c) the existence of any fact which, if established, would constitute a
breach of an international obligation ;
(d) the nature or extent of the reparation to be made for the breach
of an international obligation.”
42. Article 27, subparagraph (a), of the same Convention limits the
scope of that instrument ratione temporis by stating that it shall not apply
to “disputes relating to facts or situations prior to the entry into force of
this Convention as between the parties to the dispute”. The Convention
entered into force as between Germany and Italy on 18 April 1961.
43. The claims submitted to the Court by Germany certainly relate to
“international legal disputes” within the meaning of Article 1 as cited
above, between two States which, as has just been said, were both parties
to the Convention on the date when the Application was filed, and indeed
continue to be so.
44. The clause in the above-mentioned Article 27 imposing a limitation
ratione temporis is not applicable to Germany’s claims : the dispute which
those claims concern does not “relat[e] to facts or situations prior to the
entry into force of th[e] Convention as between the parties to the dispute”, i.e., prior to 18 April 1961. The “facts or situations” which have
given rise to the dispute before the Court are constituted by Italian judicial decisions that denied Germany the jurisdictional immunity which it
claimed, and by measures of constraint applied to property belonging to
Germany. Those decisions and measures were adopted between 2004 and
2011, thus well after the European Convention for the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes entered into force as between the Parties. It is true that
the subject-matter of the disputes to which the judicial proceedings in
question relate is reparation for the injury caused by actions of the German armed forces in 1943-1945. Germany’s complaint before the Court,
however, is not about the treatment of that subject-matter in the judgments of the Italian courts ; its complaint is solely that its immunities
from jurisdiction and enforcement have been violated. Defined in such
23
6 CIJ1031.indb 43 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 24]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 119
terms, the dispute undoubtedly relates to “facts or situations” occurring
entirely after the entry into force of the Convention as between the Parties. Italy has thus rightly not sought to argue that the dispute brought
before the Court by Germany falls wholly or partly within the limitation
ratione temporis under the above-mentioned Article 27. The Court has
jurisdiction to deal with the dispute.
45. The Parties, who have not disagreed on the analysis set out above,
have on the other hand debated the extent of the Court’s jurisdiction in a
quite different context, that of some of the arguments put forward by
Italy in its defence and relating to the alleged non-performance by Germany of its obligation to make reparation to the Italian and Greek victims of the crimes committed by the German Reich in 1943-1945.
According to Italy, a link exists between the question of Germany’s
performance of its obligation to make reparation to the victims and that
of the jurisdictional immunity which Germany might rely on before the
foreign courts to which those victims apply, in the sense that a State
which fails to perform its obligation to make reparation to the victims of
grave violations of international humanitarian law, and which offers
those victims no effective means of claiming the reparation to which they
may be entitled, would be deprived of the right to invoke its jurisdictional
immunity before the courts of the State of the victims’ nationality.
46. Germany has contended that the Court could not rule on such an
argument, on the basis that it concerned the question of reparation
claims, which relate to facts prior to 18 April 1961. According to Germany, “facts occurring before the date of the entry into force of the European Convention for the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes as between Italy
and Germany clearly lie outside the jurisdiction of the Court”, and “reparation claims do not fall within the subject-matter of the present dispute
and do not form part of the present proceedings”. Germany relies in this
respect on the Order whereby the Court dismissed Italy’s counter-claim,
which precisely asked the Court to find that Germany had violated its
obligation of reparation owed to Italian victims of war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed by the German Reich (see paragraph 38).
Germany points out that this dismissal was based on the fact that the said
counter-claim fell outside the jurisdiction of the Court, because of the
clause imposing a limitation ratione temporis in the above-mentioned
Article 27 of the European Convention for the Peaceful Settlement of
Disputes, the question of reparation claims resulting directly from the
acts committed in 1943-1945.
47. Italy has responded to this objection that, while the Order of
6 July 2010 certainly prevents it from pursuing its counter-claim in the present case, it does not on the other hand prevent it from using the arguments
on which it based that counter-claim in its defence against Germany’s
24
6 CIJ1031.indb 45 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 25]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 120
claims ; that the question of the lack of appropriate reparation is, in its
view, crucial for resolving the dispute over immunity ; and that the Court’s
jurisdiction to take cognizance of it incidentally is thus indisputable.
48. The Court notes that, since the dismissal of Italy’s counter-claim, it
no longer has before it any submissions asking it to rule on the question
of whether Germany has a duty of reparation towards the Italian victims
of the crimes committed by the German Reich and whether it has complied with that obligation in respect of all those victims, or only some of
them. The Court is therefore not called upon to rule on those questions.
49. However, in support of its submission that it has not violated Germany’s jurisdictional immunity, Italy contends that Germany stands
deprived of the right to invoke that immunity in Italian courts before
which civil actions have been brought by some of the victims, because of
the fact that it has not fully complied with its duty of reparation.
50. The Court must determine whether, as Italy maintains, the failure
of a State to perform completely a duty of reparation which it allegedly
bears is capable of having an effect, in law, on the existence and scope of
that State’s jurisdictional immunity before foreign courts. This question is
one of law on which the Court must rule in order to determine the customary international law applicable in respect of State immunity for the
purposes of the present case.
Should the preceding question be answered in the affirmative, the second question would be whether, in the specific circumstances of the case,
taking account in particular of Germany’s conduct on the issue of reparation, the Italian courts had sufficient grounds for setting aside Germany’s
immunity. It is not necessary for the Court to satisfy itself that it has
jurisdiction to respond to this second question until it has responded to
the first.
The Court considers that, at this stage, no other question arises with
regard to the existence or scope of its jurisdiction.
*
51. The Court will first address the issues raised by Germany’s first
submission, namely whether, by exercising jurisdiction over Germany
with regard to the claims brought before them by the various Italian
claimants, the Italian courts acted in breach of Italy’s obligation to accord
jurisdictional immunity to Germany. It will then turn, in Section IV, to
the measures of constraint adopted in respect of Villa Vigoni and, in Section V, to the decisions of the Italian courts declaring enforceable in Italy
the judgments of the Greek courts.
25
6 CIJ1031.indb 47 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 26]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 121
III. Alleged Violation of Germany’s
Jurisdictional Immunity in the Proceedings Brought
by the Italian Claimants
1. The Issues before the Court
52. The Court begins by observing that the proceedings in the Italian
courts have their origins in acts perpetrated by German armed forces and
other organs of the German Reich. Germany has fully acknowledged the
“untold suffering inflicted on Italian men and women in particular during
massacres, and on former Italian military internees” (Joint Declaration of
Germany and Italy, Trieste, 18 November 2008), accepts that these acts
were unlawful and stated before this Court that it “is fully aware of [its]
responsibility in this regard”. The Court considers that the acts in question can only be described as displaying a complete disregard for the
“elementary considerations of humanity” (Corfu Channel (United King‑
dom v. Albania), Merits, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1949, p. 22 ; Military
and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United
States of America), Merits, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1986, p. 112). One
category of cases involved the large-scale killing of civilians in occupied
territory as part of a policy of reprisals, exemplified by the massacres
committed on 29 June 1944 in Civitella (Val di Chiana), Cornia and San
Pancrazio by members of the “Hermann Göring” division of the German
armed forces involving the killing of 203 civilians taken as hostages after
resistance fighters had killed four German soldiers a few days earlier
(Max Josef Milde case, Military Court of La Spezia, judgment of 10 October 2006 (registered on 2 February 2007)). Another category involved
members of the civilian population who, like Mr. Luigi Ferrini, were
deported from Italy to what was in substance slave labour in Germany.
The third concerned members of the Italian armed forces who were
denied the status of prisoner of war, together with the protections which
that status entailed, to which they were entitled and who were similarly
used as forced labourers. The Court considers that there can be no doubt
that this conduct was a serious violation of the international law of armed
conflict applicable in 1943-1945. Article 6 (b) of the Charter of the International Military Tribunal, 8 August 1945 (United Nations, Treaty Series
(UNTS), Vol. 82, p. 279), convened at Nuremberg included as war crimes
“murder, ill-treatment, or deportation to slave labour or for any other
purpose of civilian population of or in occupied territory”, as well as
“murder or ill-treatment of prisoners of war”. The list of crimes against
humanity in Article 6 (c) of the Charter included “murder, extermination, enslavement, deportation, and other inhumane acts committed
against any civilian population, before or during the war”. The murder of
civilian hostages in Italy was one of the counts on which a number of war
crimes defendants were condemned in trials immediately after the Second
World War (e.g., Von Mackensen and Maelzer (1946), Annual Digest,
Vol. 13, p. 258 ; Kesselring (1947), Annual Digest, Vol. 13, p. 260 ; and
26
6 CIJ1031.indb 49 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 27]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 122
Kappler (1948), Annual Digest, Vol. 15, p. 471). The principles of the
Nuremberg Charter were confirmed by the General Assembly of the
United Nations in resolution 95 (I) of 11 December 1946.
53. However, the Court is not called upon to decide whether these acts
were illegal, a point which is not contested. The question for the Court is
whether or not, in proceedings regarding claims for compensation arising
out of those acts, the Italian courts were obliged to accord Germany
immunity. In that context, the Court notes that there is a considerable
measure of agreement between the Parties regarding the applicable law.
In particular, both Parties agree that immunity is governed by international law and is not a mere matter of comity.
54. As between Germany and Italy, any entitlement to immunity can
be derived only from customary international law, rather than treaty.
Although Germany is one of the eight States parties to the European
Convention on State Immunity of 16 May 1972 (Council of Europe, Euro‑
pean Treaty Series (ETS), No. 74 ; UNTS, Vol. 1495, p. 182) (hereinafter
the “European Convention”), Italy is not a party and the Convention is
accordingly not binding upon it. Neither State is party to the United
Nations Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their
Property, adopted on 2 December 2004 (hereinafter the “United Nations
Convention”), which is not yet in force in any event. As of 1 February 2012, the United Nations Convention had been signed by twentyeight States and obtained thirteen instruments of ratification, acceptance,
approval or accession. Article 30 of the Convention provides that it will
enter into force on the thirtieth day after deposit of the thirtieth such
instrument. Neither Germany nor Italy has signed the Convention.
55. It follows that the Court must determine, in accordance with Article 38 (1) (b) of its Statute, the existence of “international custom, as
evidence of a general practice accepted as law” conferring immunity on
States and, if so, what is the scope and extent of that immunity. To do so,
it must apply the criteria which it has repeatedly laid down for identifying
a rule of customary international law. In particular, as the Court made
clear in the North Sea Continental Shelf cases, the existence of a rule of
customary international law requires that there be “a settled practice”
together with opinio juris (North Sea Continental Shelf (Federal Republic
of Germany/Denmark ; Federal Republic of Germany/Netherlands), Judg‑
ment, I.C.J. Reports 1969, p. 44, para. 77). Moreover, as the Court has
also observed,
“[i]t is of course axiomatic that the material of customary international
law is to be looked for primarily in the actual practice and opinio juris
27
6 CIJ1031.indb 51 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 28]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 123
of States, even though multilateral conventions may have an important role to play in recording and defining rules deriving from custom,
or indeed in developing them” (Continental Shelf (Libyan Arab Jama‑
hiriya/Malta), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1985, pp. 29-30, para. 27).
In the present context, State practice of particular significance is to be
found in the judgments of national courts faced with the question whether
a foreign State is immune, the legislation of those States which have
enacted statutes dealing with immunity, the claims to immunity advanced
by States before foreign courts and the statements made by States, first in
the course of the extensive study of the subject by the International Law
Commission and then in the context of the adoption of the United
Nations Convention. Opinio juris in this context is reflected in particular
in the assertion by States claiming immunity that international law
accords them a right to such immunity from the jurisdiction of other
States ; in the acknowledgment, by States granting immunity, that international law imposes upon them an obligation to do so ; and, conversely,
in the assertion by States in other cases of a right to exercise jurisdiction
over foreign States. While it may be true that States sometimes decide to
accord an immunity more extensive than that required by international
law, for present purposes, the point is that the grant of immunity in such
a case is not accompanied by the requisite opinio juris and therefore sheds
no light upon the issue currently under consideration by the Court.
56. Although there has been much debate regarding the origins of
State immunity and the identification of the principles underlying that
immunity in the past, the International Law Commission concluded in
1980 that the rule of State immunity had been “adopted as a general rule
of customary international law solidly rooted in the current practice of
States” (Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1980, Vol. II (2),
p. 147, para. 26). That conclusion was based upon an extensive survey of
State practice and, in the opinion of the Court, is confirmed by the record
of national legislation, judicial decisions, assertions of a right to immunity and the comments of States on what became the United Nations
Convention. That practice shows that, whether in claiming immunity for
themselves or according it to others, States generally proceed on the basis
that there is a right to immunity under international law, together with a
corresponding obligation on the part of other States to respect and give
effect to that immunity.
57. The Court considers that the rule of State immunity occupies an
important place in international law and international relations. It derives
from the principle of sovereign equality of States, which, as Article 2,
paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations makes clear, is one of
the fundamental principles of the international legal order. This principle
has to be viewed together with the principle that each State possesses sov-
28
6 CIJ1031.indb 53 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 29]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 124
ereignty over its own territory and that there flows from that sovereignty
the jurisdiction of the State over events and persons within that territory.
Exceptions to the immunity of the State represent a departure from the
principle of sovereign equality. Immunity may represent a departure from
the principle of territorial sovereignty and the jurisdiction which flows
from it.
58. The Parties are thus in broad agreement regarding the validity and
importance of State immunity as a part of customary international law.
They differ, however, as to whether (as Germany contends) the law to be
applied is that which determined the scope and extent of State immunity
in 1943-1945, i.e., at the time that the events giving rise to the proceedings
in the Italian courts took place, or (as Italy maintains) that which applied
at the time the proceedings themselves occurred. The Court observes that,
in accordance with the principle stated in Article 13 of the International
Law Commission Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts, the compatibility of an act with international law can be
determined only by reference to the law in force at the time when the act
occurred. In that context, it is important to distinguish between the relevant acts of Germany and those of Italy. The relevant German acts —
which are described in paragraph 52 — occurred in 1943-1945, and it is,
therefore, the international law of that time which is applicable to them.
The relevant Italian acts — the denial of immunity and exercise of jurisdiction by the Italian courts — did not occur until the proceedings in the
Italian courts took place. Since the claim before the Court concerns the
actions of the Italian courts, it is the international law in force at the time
of those proceedings which the Court has to apply. Moreover, as the
Court has stated (in the context of the personal immunities accorded by
international law to foreign ministers), the law of immunity is essentially
procedural in nature (Arrest Warrant of 1 April 2000 (Democratic Repub‑
lic of the Congo v. Belgium), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2002, p. 25,
para. 60). It regulates the exercise of jurisdiction in respect of particular
conduct and is thus entirely distinct from the substantive law which determines whether that conduct is lawful or unlawful. For these reasons, the
Court considers that it must examine and apply the law on State immunity as it existed at the time of the Italian proceedings, rather than that
which existed in 1943-1945.
59. The Parties also differ as to the scope and extent of the rule of State
immunity. In that context, the Court notes that many States (including
both Germany and Italy) now distinguish between acta jure gestionis, in
respect of which they have limited the immunity which they claim for
themselves and which they accord to others, and acta jure imperii. That
approach has also been followed in the United Nations Convention and
the European Convention (see also the draft Inter-American Convention
on Jurisdictional Immunity of States drawn up by the Inter-American
29
6 CIJ1031.indb 55 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 30]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 125
Juridical Committee of the Organization of American States in 1983
(ILM, Vol. 22, p. 292)).
60. The Court is not called upon to address the question of how international law treats the issue of State immunity in respect of acta jure
gestionis. The acts of the German armed forces and other State organs
which were the subject of the proceedings in the Italian courts clearly
constituted acta jure imperii. The Court notes that Italy, in response to a
question posed by a Member of the Court, recognized that those acts had
to be characterized as acta jure imperii, notwithstanding that they were
unlawful. The Court considers that the terms “jure imperii” and “jure ges‑
tionis” do not imply that the acts in question are lawful but refer rather to
whether the acts in question fall to be assessed by reference to the law
governing the exercise of sovereign power (jus imperii) or the law concerning non-sovereign activities of a State, especially private and commercial activities (jus gestionis). To the extent that this distinction is
significant for determining whether or not a State is entitled to immunity
from the jurisdiction of another State’s courts in respect of a particular
act, it has to be applied before that jurisdiction can be exercised, whereas
the legality or illegality of the act is something which can be determined
only in the exercise of that jurisdiction. Although the present case is
unusual in that the illegality of the acts at issue has been admitted by
Germany at all stages of the proceedings, the Court considers that this
fact does not alter the characterization of those acts as acta jure imperii.
61. Both Parties agree that States are generally entitled to immunity in
respect of acta jure imperii. That is the approach taken in the United
Nations, European and draft Inter-American Conventions, the national
legislation in those States which have adopted statutes on the subject and
the jurisprudence of national courts. It is against that background that
the Court must approach the question raised by the present proceedings,
namely whether that immunity is applicable to acts committed by the
armed forces of a State (and other organs of that State acting in co-operation with the armed forces) in the course of conducting an armed conflict. Germany maintains that immunity is applicable and that there is no
relevant limitation on the immunity to which a State is entitled in respect
of acta jure imperii. Italy, in its pleadings before the Court, maintains that
Germany is not entitled to immunity in respect of the cases before the
Italian courts for two reasons : first, that immunity as to acta jure imperii
does not extend to torts or delicts occasioning death, personal injury or
damage to property committed on the territory of the forum State, and,
secondly, that, irrespective of where the relevant acts took place, Germany was not entitled to immunity because those acts involved the most
serious violations of rules of international law of a peremptory character
for which no alternative means of redress was available. The Court will
consider each of Italy’s arguments in turn.
30
6 CIJ1031.indb 57 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 31]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 126
2. Italy’s First Argument :
The Territorial Tort Principle
62. The essence of the first Italian argument is that customary international law has developed to the point where a State is no longer entitled
to immunity in respect of acts occasioning death, personal injury or damage to property on the territory of the forum State, even if the act in question was performed jure imperii. Italy recognizes that this argument is
applicable only to those of the claims brought before the Italian courts
which concern acts that occurred in Italy and not to the cases of Italian
military internees taken prisoner outside Italy and transferred to Germany or other territories outside Italy as forced labour. In support of its
argument, Italy points to the adoption of Article 11 of the European
Convention and Article 12 of the United Nations Convention and to the
fact that nine of the ten States it identified which have adopted legislation
specifically dealing with State immunity (the exception being Pakistan)
have enacted provisions similar to those in the two Conventions. Italy
acknowledges that the European Convention contains a provision to the
effect that the Convention is not applicable to the acts of foreign armed
forces (Art. 31) but maintains that this provision is merely a saving
clause aimed primarily at avoiding conflicts between the Convention and
instruments regulating the status of visiting forces present with the consent of the territorial sovereign and that it does not show that States are
entitled to immunity in respect of the acts of their armed forces in another
State. Italy dismisses the significance of certain statements (discussed in
paragraph 69 below) made during the process of adoption of the United
Nations Convention suggesting that that Convention did not apply to the
acts of armed forces. Italy also notes that two of the national statutes
(those of the United Kingdom and Singapore) are not applicable to the
acts of foreign armed forces but argues that the other seven (those of
Argentina, Australia, Canada, Israel, Japan, South Africa and the United
States of America) amount to significant State practice asserting jurisdiction over torts occasioned by foreign armed forces.
63. Germany maintains that, in so far as they deny a State immunity in
respect of acta jure imperii, neither Article 11 of the European Convention, nor Article 12 of the United Nations Convention reflects customary
international law. It contends that, in any event, they are irrelevant to the
present proceedings, because neither provision was intended to apply to
the acts of armed forces. Germany also points to the fact that, with the
exception of the Italian cases and the Distomo case in Greece, no national
court has ever held that a State was not entitled to immunity in respect of
acts of its armed forces, in the context of an armed conflict and that, by
31
6 CIJ1031.indb 59 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 32]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 127
contrast, the courts in several States have expressly declined jurisdiction
in such cases on the ground that the respondent State was entitled to
immunity.
*
64. The Court begins by observing that the notion that State immunity
does not extend to civil proceedings in respect of acts committed on the
territory of the forum State causing death, personal injury or damage to
property originated in cases concerning road traffic accidents and other
“insurable risks”. The limitation of immunity recognized by some national
courts in such cases was treated as confined to acta jure gestionis (see, e.g.,
the judgment of the Supreme Court of Austria in Holubek v. Government
of the United States of America (Juristische Blätter (Vienna), Vol. 84, 1962,
p. 43 ; ILR, Vol. 40, p. 73)). The Court notes, however, that none of the
national legislation which provides for a “territorial tort exception” to
immunity expressly distinguishes between acta jure gestionis and acta jure
imperii. The Supreme Court of Canada expressly rejected the suggestion
that the exception in the Canadian legislation was subject to such a distinction (Schreiber v. Federal Republic of Germany and the Attorney Gen‑
eral of Canada, [2002] Supreme Court Reports (SCR), Vol. 3, p. 269,
paras. 33-36). Nor is such a distinction featured in either Article 11 of the
European Convention or Article 12 of the United Nations Convention.
The International Law Commission’s commentary on the text of what
became Article 12 of the United Nations Convention makes clear that
this was a deliberate choice and that the provision was not intended to be
restricted to acta jure gestionis (Yearbook of the International Law Com‑
mission, 1991, Vol. II (2), p. 45, para. 8). Germany has not, however, been
alone in suggesting that, in so far as it was intended to apply to acta jure
imperii, Article 12 was not representative of customary international law.
In criticizing the International Law Commission’s draft of what became
Article 12, China commented in 1990 that “the article had gone even further than the restrictive doctrine, for it made no distinction between sovereign acts and private law acts” (United Nations doc. A/C.6/45/SR.25,
p. 2) and the United States, commenting in 2004 on the draft United
Nations Convention, stated that Article 12 “must be interpreted and
applied consistently with the time-honoured distinction between acts jure
imperii and acts jure gestionis” since to extend jurisdiction without regard
to that distinction “would be contrary to the existing principles of international law” (United Nations doc. A/C.6/59/SR.13, p. 10, para. 63).
65. The Court considers that it is not called upon in the present proceedings to resolve the question whether there is in customary interna-
32
6 CIJ1031.indb 61 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 33]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 128
tional law a “tort exception” to State immunity applicable to acta jure
imperii in general. The issue before the Court is confined to acts committed on the territory of the forum State by the armed forces of a foreign
State, and other organs of State working in co-operation with those
armed forces, in the course of conducting an armed conflict.
66. The Court will first consider whether the adoption of Article 11 of
the European Convention or Article 12 of the United Nations Convention affords any support to Italy’s contention that States are no longer
entitled to immunity in respect of the type of acts specified in the preceding paragraph. As the Court has already explained (see paragraph 54
above), neither Convention is in force between the Parties to the present
case. The provisions of these Conventions are, therefore, relevant only in
so far as their provisions and the process of their adoption and implementation shed light on the content of customary international law.
67. Article 11 of the European Convention states the territorial tort
principle in broad terms,
“A Contracting State cannot claim immunity from the jurisdiction
of a court of another Contracting State in proceedings which relate to
redress for injury to the person or damage to tangible property, if the
facts which occasioned the injury or damage occurred in the territory
of the State of the forum, and if the author of the injury or damage
was present in that territory at the time when those facts occurred.”
That provision must, however, be read in the light of Article 31, which
provides,
“Nothing in this Convention shall affect any immunities or privileges enjoyed by a Contracting State in respect of anything done or
omitted to be done by, or in relation to, its armed forces when on the
territory of another Contracting State.”
Although one of the concerns which Article 31 was intended to address
was the relationship between the Convention and the various agreements
on the status of visiting forces, the language of Article 31 makes clear that
it is not confined to that matter and excludes from the scope of the Convention all proceedings relating to acts of foreign armed forces, irrespective of whether those forces are present in the territory of the forum with
the consent of the forum State and whether their acts take place in peacetime or in conditions of armed conflict. The Explanatory Report on the
Convention, which contains a detailed commentary prepared as part of
the negotiating process, states in respect of Article 31,
“The Convention is not intended to govern situations which may
arise in the event of armed conflict ; nor can it be invoked to resolve
33
6 CIJ1031.indb 63 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 34]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 129
problems which may arise between allied States as a result of the
stationing of forces. These problems are generally dealt with by special agreements (cf. Art. 33).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[Article 31] prevents the Convention being interpreted as having
any influence upon these matters.” (Para. 116 ; emphasis added.)
68. The Court agrees with Italy that Article 31 takes effect as a “saving
clause”, with the result that the immunity of a State for the acts of its
armed forces falls entirely outside the Convention and has to be determined by reference to customary international law. The consequence,
however, is that the inclusion of the “territorial tort principle” in Article 11 of the Convention cannot be treated as support for the argument
that a State is not entitled to immunity for torts committed by its armed
forces. As the Explanatory Report states, the effect of Article 31 is that
the Convention has no influence upon that question. Courts in Belgium
(judgment of the Court of First Instance of Ghent in Botelberghe v. Ger‑
man State, 18 February 2000), Ireland (judgment of the Supreme Court in
McElhinney v. Williams, 15 December 1995, [1995] 3 Irish Reports 382 ;
ILR, Vol. 104, p. 691), Slovenia (case No. Up-13/99, Constitutional
Court, para. 13), Greece (Margellos v. Federal Republic of Germany, case
No. 6/2002, ILR, Vol. 129, p. 529) and Poland (judgment of the Supreme
Court of Poland, Natoniewski v. Federal Republic of Germany, Polish
Yearbook of International Law, Vol. XXX, 2010, p. 299) have concluded
that Article 31 means that the immunity of a State for torts committed by
its armed forces is unaffected by Article 11 of the Convention.
69. Article 12 of the United Nations Convention provides,
“Unless otherwise agreed between the States concerned, a State
cannot invoke immunity from jurisdiction before a court of another
State which is otherwise competent in a proceeding which relates to
pecuniary compensation for death or injury to the person, or damage
to or loss of tangible property, caused by an act or omission which is
alleged to be attributable to the State, if the act or omission occurred
in whole or in part in the territory of that other State and if the
author of the act or omission was present in that territory at the time
of the act or omission.”
Unlike the European Convention, the United Nations Convention contains no express provision excluding the acts of armed forces from its
scope. However, the International Law Commission’s commentary on the
text of Article 12 states that that provision does not apply to “situations
involving armed conflicts” (Yearbook of the International Law Commis‑
34
6 CIJ1031.indb 65 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 35]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 130
sion, 1991, Vol. II (2), p. 46, para. 10). Moreover, in presenting to the
Sixth Committee of the General Assembly the Report of the Ad Hoc
Committee on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property
(United Nations doc. A/59/22), the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee
stated that the draft Convention had been prepared on the basis of a general understanding that military activities were not covered (United
Nations doc. A/C.6/59/SR.13, p. 6, para. 36).
No State questioned this interpretation. Moreover, the Court notes
that two of the States which have so far ratified the Convention, Norway
and Sweden, made declarations in identical terms stating their understanding that “the Convention does not apply to military activities,
including the activities of armed forces during an armed conflict, as those
terms are understood under international humanitarian law, and activities undertaken by military forces of a State in the exercise of their official
duties” (United Nations doc. C.N.280.2006.TREATIES-2 and United
Nations doc. C.N.912.2009.TREATIES-1). In the light of these various
statements, the Court concludes that the inclusion in the Convention of
Article 12 cannot be taken as affording any support to the contention
that customary international law denies State immunity in tort proceedings relating to acts occasioning death, personal injury or damage to
property committed in the territory of the forum State by the armed
forces and associated organs of another State in the context of an armed
conflict.
70. Turning to State practice in the form of national legislation, the
Court notes that nine of the ten States referred to by the Parties which
have legislated specifically for the subject of State immunity have adopted
provisions to the effect that a State is not entitled to immunity in respect
of torts occasioning death, personal injury or damage to property occurring on the territory of the forum State (United States of America Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act 1976, 28 USC, Sect. 1605 (a) (5) ; United
Kingdom State Immunity Act 1978, Sect. 5 ; South Africa Foreign States
Immunities Act 1981, Sect. 6 ; Canada State Immunity Act 1985, Sect. 6 ;
Australia Foreign States Immunities Act 1985, Sect. 13 ; Singapore State
Immunity Act 1985, Sect. 7 ; Argentina Law No. 24.488 (Statute on
the Immunity of Foreign States before Argentine Tribunals) 1995,
Art. 2 (e) ; Israel Foreign State Immunity Law 2008, Sect. 5 ; and Japan,
Act on the Civil Jurisdiction of Japan with respect to a Foreign State,
2009, Art. 10). Only Pakistan’s State Immunity Ordinance 1981 contains
no comparable provision.
71. Two of these statutes (the United Kingdom State Immunity
Act 1978, Section 16 (2) and the Singapore State Immunity Act 1985, Sec-
35
6 CIJ1031.indb 67 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 36]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 131
tion 19 (2) (a)) contain provisions that exclude proceedings relating to
the acts of foreign armed forces from their application. The corresponding provisions in the Canadian, Australian and Israeli statutes exclude
only the acts of visiting forces present with the consent of the host State
or matters covered by legislation regarding such visiting forces (Canada
State Immunity Act 1985, Section 16 ; Australia Foreign States Immunities Act 1985, Section 6 ; Israel Foreign State Immunity Law 2008, Section 22). The legislation of South Africa, Argentina and Japan contains
no exclusion clause. However, the Japanese statute (in Article 3) states
that its provisions “shall not affect the privileges or immunities enjoyed
by a foreign State . . . based on treaties or the established international
law”.
The United States Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act 1976 contains no
provision specifically addressing claims relating to the acts of foreign
armed forces but its provision that there is no immunity in respect of
claims “in which money damages are sought against a foreign State for
personal injury or death, or damage to or loss of property, occurring in
the United States and caused by the tortious act or omission of that foreign State” (Sec. 1605 (a) (5)) is subject to an exception for “any claim
based upon the exercise or performance or the failure to exercise or
perform a discretionary function regardless of whether the discretion be
abused” (Sec. 1605 (a) (5) (A)). Interpreting this provision, which has no
counterpart in the legislation of other States, a court in the United States
has held that a foreign State whose agents committed an assassination
in the United States was not entitled to immunity (Letelier v. Republic of
Chile (1980), Federal Supplement (F. Supp.), Vol. 488, p. 665 ; ILR,
Vol. 63, p. 378 (United States District Court, District of Columbia)).
However, the Court is not aware of any case in the United States where
the courts have been called upon to apply this provision to acts performed
by the armed forces and associated organs of foreign States in the course
of an armed conflict.
Indeed, in none of the seven States in which the legislation contains no
general exclusion for the acts of armed forces, have the courts been called
upon to apply that legislation in a case involving the armed forces of a
foreign State, and associated organs of State, acting in the context of an
armed conflict.
72. The Court next turns to State practice in the form of the judgments
of national courts regarding State immunity in relation to the acts of
armed forces. The question whether a State is entitled to immunity in
proceedings concerning torts allegedly committed by its armed forces
when stationed on or visiting the territory of another State, with the consent of the latter, has been considered by national courts on a number of
occasions. Decisions of the courts of Egypt (Bassionni Amrane v. John,
Gazette des Tribunaux mixtes d’Egypte, January 1934, p. 108 ; Annual
Digest, Vol. 7, p. 187), Belgium (S.A. Eau, gaz, électricité et applications v.
36
6 CIJ1031.indb 69 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 37]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 132
Office d’aide mutuelle, Cour d’appel, Brussels, Pasicrisie belge, 1957,
Vol. 144, 2nd Part, p. 88 ; ILR, Vol. 23, p. 205) and Germany (Immunity
of the United Kingdom, Court of Appeal of Schleswig, Jahrbuch für Inter‑
nationales Recht, 1957, Vol. 7, p. 400 ; ILR, Vol. 24, p. 207) are earlier
examples of national courts according immunity where the acts of foreign
armed forces were characterized as acta jure imperii. Since then, several
national courts have held that a State is immune with respect to damage
caused by warships (United States of America v. Eemshaven Port Author‑
ity, Supreme Court of the Netherlands, Nederlandse Jurisprudentie, 2001,
No. 567 ; ILR, Vol. 127, p. 225 ; Allianz Via Insurance v. United States of
America (1999), Cour d’appel, Aix-en-Provence, 2nd Chamber, judgment
of 3 September 1999, ILR, Vol. 127, p. 148) or military exercises
(FILT‑CGIL Trento v. United States of America, Italian Court of Cassation, Rivista di diritto internazionale, Vol. 83, 2000, p. 1155 ; ILR, Vol. 128,
p. 644). The United Kingdom courts have held that customary international law required immunity in proceedings for torts committed by foreign armed forces on United Kingdom territory if the acts in question
were acta jure imperii (Littrell v. United States of America (No. 2), Court
of Appeal, [1995] 1 Weekly Law Reports (WLR) 82 ; ILR, Vol. 100,
p. 438 ; Holland v. Lampen‑Wolfe, House of Lords, [2000] 1 WLR 1573 ;
ILR, Vol. 119, p. 367).
The Supreme Court of Ireland held that international law required that
a foreign State be accorded immunity in respect of acts jure imperii carried out by members of its armed forces even when on the territory of the
forum State without the forum State’s permission (McElhinney v. Wil‑
liams, [1995] 3 Irish Reports 382 ; ILR, Vol. 104, p. 691). The Grand
Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights later held that this
decision reflected a widely held view of international law so that the grant
of immunity could not be regarded as incompatible with the European
Convention on Human Rights (McElhinney v. Ireland [GC], application
No. 31253/96, judgment of 21 November 2001, ECHR Reports 2001-XI,
p. 39 ; ILR, Vol. 123, p. 73, para. 38).
While not directly concerned with the specific issue which arises in the
present case, these judicial decisions, which do not appear to have been
contradicted in any other national court judgments, suggest that a State
is entitled to immunity in respect of acta jure imperii committed by its
armed forces on the territory of another State.
73. The Court considers, however, that for the purposes of the present
case the most pertinent State practice is to be found in those national
judicial decisions which concerned the question whether a State was entitled to immunity in proceedings concerning acts allegedly committed by
its armed forces in the course of an armed conflict. All of those cases, the
facts of which are often very similar to those of the cases before the
37
6 CIJ1031.indb 71 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 38]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 133
Italian courts, concern the events of the Second World War. In this context, the Cour de cassation in France has consistently held that Germany
was entitled to immunity in a series of cases brought by claimants who had
been deported from occupied French territory during the Second World
War (No. 02-45961, 16 December 2003, Bull. civ., 2003, I, No. 258, p. 206
(the Bucheron case) ; No. 03-41851, 2 June 2004, Bull. civ., 2004, I,
No. 158, p. 132 (the X case) and No. 04-47504, 3 January 2006 (the Grosz
case)). The Court also notes that the European Court of Human Rights
held in Grosz v. France (application No. 14717/06, decision of
16 June 2009) that France had not contravened the European Convention
on Human Rights in the proceedings which were the subject of the 2006
Cour de cassation judgment (judgment No. 04-47504), because the Cour
de cassation had given effect to an immunity required by international
law.
74. The highest courts in Slovenia and Poland have also held that Germany was entitled to immunity in respect of unlawful acts perpetrated on
their territory by its armed forces during the Second World War. In 2001
the Constitutional Court of Slovenia ruled that Germany was entitled to
immunity in an action brought by a claimant who had been deported to
Germany during the German occupation and that the Supreme Court of
Slovenia had not acted arbitrarily in upholding that immunity (case
No. Up-13/99, judgment of 8 March 2001). The Supreme Court of Poland
held, in Natoniewski v. Federal Republic of Germany (judgment of
29 October 2010, Polish Yearbook of International Law, Vol. XXX, 2010,
p. 299), that Germany was entitled to immunity in an action brought by
a claimant who in 1944 had suffered injuries when German forces burned
his village in occupied Poland and murdered several hundred of its inhabitants. The Supreme Court, after an extensive review of the decisions in
Ferrini, Distomo and Margellos, as well as the provisions of the European
Convention and the United Nations Convention and a range of other
materials, concluded that States remained entitled to immunity in respect
of torts allegedly committed by their armed forces in the course of an
armed conflict. Judgments by lower courts in Belgium (judgment of the
Court of First Instance of Ghent in 2000 in Botelberghe v. German State),
Serbia (judgment of the Court of First Instance of Leskovac, 1 November 2001) and Brazil (Barreto v. Federal Republic of Germany, Federal
Court, Rio de Janeiro, judgment of 9 July 2008 holding Germany immune
in proceedings regarding the sinking of a Brazilian fishing vessel by a
German submarine in Brazilian waters) have also held that Germany was
immune in actions for acts of war committed on their territory or in their
waters.
75. Finally, the Court notes that the German courts have also concluded that the territorial tort principle did not remove a State’s entitle-
38
6 CIJ1031.indb 73 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 39]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 134
ment to immunity under international law in respect of acts committed by
its armed forces, even where those acts took place on the territory of the
forum State (judgment of the Federal Supreme Court of 26 June 2003
(Greek Citizens v. Federal Republic of Germany, case No. III ZR 245/98,
NJW, 2003, p. 3488 ; ILR, Vol. 129, p. 556), declining to give effect in
Germany to the Greek judgment in the Distomo case on the ground that
it had been given in breach of Germany’s entitlement to immunity).
76. The only State in which there is any judicial practice which appears
to support the Italian argument, apart from the judgments of the Italian
courts which are the subject of the present proceedings, is Greece. The
judgment of the Hellenic Supreme Court in the Distomo case in 2000 contains an extensive discussion of the territorial tort principle without any
suggestion that it does not extend to the acts of armed forces during an
armed conflict. However, the Greek Special Supreme Court, in its judgment in Margellos v. Federal Republic of Germany (case No. 6/2002,
ILR, Vol. 129, p. 525), repudiated the reasoning of the Supreme Court in
Distomo and held that Germany was entitled to immunity. In particular,
the Special Supreme Court held that the territorial tort principle was not
applicable to the acts of the armed forces of a State in the conduct of
armed conflict. While that judgment does not alter the outcome in the
Distomo case, a matter considered below, Greece has informed the Court
that courts and other bodies in Greece faced with the same issue of
whether immunity is applicable to torts allegedly committed by foreign
armed forces in Greece are required to follow the stance taken by the
Special Supreme Court in its decision in Margellos unless they consider
that customary international law has changed since the Margellos judgment. Germany has pointed out that, since the judgment in Margellos
was given, no Greek court has denied immunity in proceedings brought
against Germany in respect of torts allegedly committed by German
armed forces during the Second World War and in a 2009 decision (decision No. 853/2009), the Supreme Court, although deciding the case on a
different ground, approved the reasoning in Margellos. In view of the
judgment in Margellos and the dictum in the 2009 case, as well as the
decision of the Greek Government not to permit enforcement of the Dis‑
tomo judgment in Greece itself and the Government’s defence of that
decision before the European Court of Human Rights in Kalogeropoulou
and Others v. Greece and Germany (application No. 59021/00, decision of
12 December 2002, ECHR Reports 2002-X, p. 417 ; ILR, Vol. 129, p. 537),
the Court concludes that Greek State practice taken as a whole actually
contradicts, rather than supports, Italy’s argument.
77. In the Court’s opinion, State practice in the form of judicial decisions supports the proposition that State immunity for acta jure imperii
39
6 CIJ1031.indb 75 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 40]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 135
continues to extend to civil proceedings for acts occasioning death, personal injury or damage to property committed by the armed forces and
other organs of a State in the conduct of armed conflict, even if the relevant acts take place on the territory of the forum State. That practice is
accompanied by opinio juris, as demonstrated by the positions taken by
States and the jurisprudence of a number of national courts which have
made clear that they considered that customary international law required
immunity. The almost complete absence of contrary jurisprudence is also
significant, as is the absence of any statements by States in connection
with the work of the International Law Commission regarding State
immunity and the adoption of the United Nations Convention or, so far
as the Court has been able to discover, in any other context asserting that
customary international law does not require immunity in such cases.
78. In light of the foregoing, the Court considers that customary international law continues to require that a State be accorded immunity in
proceedings for torts allegedly committed on the territory of another
State by its armed forces and other organs of State in the course of conducting an armed conflict. That conclusion is confirmed by the judgments
of the European Court of Human Rights to which the Court has referred
(see paragraphs 72, 73 and 76).
79. The Court therefore concludes that, contrary to what had been
argued by Italy in the present proceedings, the decision of the Italian
courts to deny immunity to Germany cannot be justified on the basis of
the territorial tort principle.
3. Italy’s Second Argument : The Subject‑Matter and Circumstances
of the Claims in the Italian Courts
80. Italy’s second argument, which, unlike its first argument, applies to
all of the claims brought before the Italian courts, is that the denial of
immunity was justified on account of the particular nature of the acts
forming the subject-matter of the claims before the Italian courts and the
circumstances in which those claims were made. There are three strands
to this argument. First, Italy contends that the acts which gave rise to the
claims constituted serious violations of the principles of international law
applicable to the conduct of armed conflict, amounting to war crimes and
crimes against humanity. Secondly, Italy maintains that the rules of international law thus contravened were peremptory norms (jus cogens).
Thirdly, Italy argues that the claimants having been denied all other
forms of redress, the exercise of jurisdiction by the Italian courts was necessary as a matter of last resort. The Court will consider each of these
strands in turn, while recognizing that, in the oral proceedings, Italy also
contended that its courts had been entitled to deny State immunity
because of the combined effect of these three strands.
40
6 CIJ1031.indb 77 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 41]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 136
A. The gravity of the violations
81. The first strand is based upon the proposition that international
law does not accord immunity to a State, or at least restricts its right to
immunity, when that State has committed serious violations of the law of
armed conflict (international humanitarian law as it is more commonly
termed today, although the term was not used in 1943-1945). In the present case, the Court has already made clear (see paragraph 52 above) that
the actions of the German armed forces and other organs of the German
Reich giving rise to the proceedings before the Italian courts were serious
violations of the law of armed conflict which amounted to crimes under
international law. The question is whether that fact operates to deprive
Germany of an entitlement to immunity.
82. At the outset, however, the Court must observe that the proposition
that the availability of immunity will be to some extent dependent upon the
gravity of the unlawful act presents a logical problem. Immunity from
jurisdiction is an immunity not merely from being subjected to an adverse
judgment but from being subjected to the trial process. It is, therefore, necessarily preliminary in nature. Consequently, a national court is required to
determine whether or not a foreign State is entitled to immunity as a matter
of international law before it can hear the merits of the case brought before
it and before the facts have been established. If immunity were to be dependent upon the State actually having committed a serious violation of international human rights law or the law of armed conflict, then it would
become necessary for the national court to hold an enquiry into the merits
in order to determine whether it had jurisdiction. If, on the other hand, the
mere allegation that the State had committed such wrongful acts were to be
sufficient to deprive the State of its entitlement to immunity, immunity
could, in effect be negated simply by skilful construction of the claim.
83. That said, the Court must nevertheless inquire whether customary
international law has developed to the point where a State is not entitled
to immunity in the case of serious violations of human rights law or the
law of armed conflict. Apart from the decisions of the Italian courts
which are the subject of the present proceedings, there is almost no State
practice which might be considered to support the proposition that a
State is deprived of its entitlement to immunity in such a case. Although
the Hellenic Supreme Court in the Distomo case adopted a form of that
proposition, the Special Supreme Court in Margellos repudiated that
approach two years later. As the Court has noted in paragraph 76 above,
under Greek law it is the stance adopted in Margellos which must be followed in later cases unless the Greek courts find that there has been a
change in customary international law since 2002, which they have not
done. As with the territorial tort principle, the Court considers that Greek
practice, taken as a whole, tends to deny that the proposition advanced
by Italy has become part of customary international law.
41
6 CIJ1031.indb 79 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 42]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 137
84. In addition, there is a substantial body of State practice from other
countries which demonstrates that customary international law does not
treat a State’s entitlement to immunity as dependent upon the gravity of
the act of which it is accused or the peremptory nature of the rule which
it is alleged to have violated.
85. That practice is particularly evident in the judgments of national
courts. Arguments to the effect that international law no longer required
State immunity in cases of allegations of serious violations of international human rights law, war crimes or crimes against humanity have
been rejected by the courts in Canada (Bouzari v. Islamic Republic of Iran,
Court of Appeal of Ontario, [2004] Dominion Law Reports (DLR),
4th Series, Vol. 243, p. 406 ; ILR, Vol. 128, p. 586 ; allegations of torture),
France (judgment of the Court of Appeal of Paris, 9 September 2002, and
Cour de cassation, No. 02-45961, 16 December 2003, Bulletin civil de la
Cour de cassation (Bull. civ.), 2003, I, No. 258, p. 206 (the Bucheron
case) ; Cour de cassation, No. 03-41851, 2 June 2004, Bull. civ., 2004, I,
No. 158, p. 132 (the X case) and Cour de cassation, No. 04-47504, 3 January 2006 (the Grosz case) ; allegations of crimes against humanity), Slovenia (case No. Up-13/99, Constitutional Court of Slovenia ; allegations of
war crimes and crimes against humanity), New Zealand (Fang v. Jiang,
High Court, [2007] New Zealand Administrative Reports (NZAR), p. 420 ;
ILR, Vol. 141, p. 702 ; allegations of torture), Poland (Natoniewski,
Supreme Court, 2010, Polish Yearbook of International Law, Vol. XXX,
2010, p. 299 ; allegations of war crimes and crimes against humanity)
and the United Kingdom (Jones v. Saudi Arabia, House of Lords, [2007]
1 Appeal Cases (AC) 270 ; ILR, Vol. 129, p. 629 ; allegations of torture).
86. The Court notes that, in its response to a question posed by a
Member of the Court, Italy itself appeared to demonstrate uncertainty
about this aspect of its case. Italy commented,
“Italy is aware of the view according to which war crimes and
crimes against humanity could not be considered to be sovereign acts
for which the State is entitled to invoke the defence of sovereign
immunity . . . While Italy acknowledges that in this area the law of
State immunity is undergoing a process of change, it also recognizes
that it is not clear at this stage whether this process will result in a
new general exception to immunity — namely a rule denying immunity with respect to every claim for compensation arising out [of]
international crimes.”
A similar uncertainty is evident in the orders of the Italian Court of Cassation in Mantelli and Maietta (orders of 29 May 2008).
87. The Court does not consider that the United Kingdom judgment in
Pinochet (No. 3) ([2000] 1 AC 147 ; ILR, Vol. 119, p. 136) is relevant,
notwithstanding the reliance placed on that judgment by the Italian Court
42
6 CIJ1031.indb 81 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 43]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 138
of Cassation in Ferrini. Pinochet concerned the immunity of a former
Head of State from the criminal jurisdiction of another State, not the
immunity of the State itself in proceedings designed to establish its liability to damages. The distinction between the immunity of the official in the
former type of case and that of the State in the latter case was emphasized
by several of the judges in Pinochet (Lord Hutton at pp. 254 and 264,
Lord Millett at p. 278 and Lord Phillips at pp. 280-281). In its later judgment in Jones v. Saudi Arabia ([2007] 1 AC 270 ; ILR, Vol. 129, p. 629),
the House of Lords further clarified this distinction, Lord Bingham
describing the distinction between criminal and civil proceedings as “fundamental to the decision” in Pinochet (para. 32). Moreover, the rationale
for the judgment in Pinochet was based upon the specific language of the
1984 United Nations Convention against Torture, which has no bearing
on the present case.
88. With reference to national legislation, Italy referred to an amendment to the United States Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act, first
adopted in 1996. That amendment withdraws immunity for certain specified acts (for example, torture and extra-judicial killings) if allegedly performed by a State which the United States Government has “designated
as a State sponsor of terrorism” (28 USC 1605A). The Court notes that
this amendment has no counterpart in the legislation of other States.
None of the States which has enacted legislation on the subject of State
immunity has made provision for the limitation of immunity on the
grounds of the gravity of the acts alleged.
89. It is also noticeable that there is no limitation of State immunity by
reference to the gravity of the violation or the peremptory character of
the rule breached in the European Convention, the United Nations Convention or the draft Inter-American Convention. The absence of any such
provision from the United Nations Convention is particularly significant,
because the question whether such a provision was necessary was raised
at the time that the text of what became the Convention was under consideration. In 1999 the International Law Commission established a
Working Group which considered certain developments in practice
regarding some issues of State immunity which had been identified by the
Sixth Committee of the General Assembly. In an appendix to its report,
the Working Group referred, as an additional matter, to developments
regarding claims “in the case of death or personal injury resulting from
acts of a State in violation of human rights norms having the character of
jus cogens” and stated that this issue was one which should not be ignored,
although it did not recommend any amendment to the text of the International Law Commission Articles (Yearbook of the International Law
Commission, 1999, Vol. II (2), pp. 171-172). The matter was then considered by the Working Group established by the Sixth Committee of the
General Assembly, which reported later in 1999 that it had decided not to
take up the matter as “it did not seem to be ripe enough for the Working
43
6 CIJ1031.indb 83 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 44]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 139
Group to engage in a codification exercise over it” and commented that it
was for the Sixth Committee to decide what course of action, if any,
should be taken (United Nations doc. A/C.6/54/L.12, p. 7, para. 13). During the subsequent debates in the Sixth Committee no State suggested
that a jus cogens limitation to immunity should be included in the Convention. The Court considers that this history indicates that, at the time
of adoption of the United Nations Convention in 2004, States did not
consider that customary international law limited immunity in the manner now suggested by Italy.
90. The European Court of Human Rights has not accepted the proposition that States are no longer entitled to immunity in cases regarding
serious violations of international humanitarian law or human rights law.
In 2001, the Grand Chamber of that Court, by the admittedly narrow
majority of nine to eight, concluded that,
“Notwithstanding the special character of the prohibition of torture
in international law, the Court is unable to discern in the international
instruments, judicial authorities or other materials before it any firm
basis for concluding that, as a matter of international law, a State no
longer enjoys immunity from civil suit in the courts of another State
where acts of torture are alleged.” (Al‑Adsani v. United Kingdom
[GC], application No. 35763/97, judgment of 21 November 2001,
ECHR Reports 2001-XI, p. 101, para. 61 ; ILR, Vol. 123, p. 24.)
The following year, in Kalogeropoulou and Others v. Greece and Germany,
the European Court of Human Rights rejected an application relating to
the refusal of the Greek Government to permit enforcement of the Dis‑
tomo judgment and said that,
“The Court does not find it established, however, that there is yet
acceptance in international law of the proposition that States are not
entitled to immunity in respect of civil claims for damages brought
against them in another State for crimes against humanity.” (Application No. 59021/00, decision of 12 December 2002, ECHR Reports
2002-X, p. 417 ; ILR, Vol. 129, p. 537.)
91. The Court concludes that, under customary international law as it
presently stands, a State is not deprived of immunity by reason of the fact
that it is accused of serious violations of international human rights law
or the international law of armed conflict. In reaching that conclusion,
the Court must emphasize that it is addressing only the immunity of the
State itself from the jurisdiction of the courts of other States ; the question
of whether, and if so to what extent, immunity might apply in criminal
proceedings against an official of the State is not in issue in the present
case.
44
6 CIJ1031.indb 85 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 45]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 140
B. The relationship between jus cogens and the rule of State immunity
92. The Court now turns to the second strand in Italy’s argument,
which emphasizes the jus cogens status of the rules which were violated by
Germany during the period 1943-1945. This strand of the argument rests
on the premise that there is a conflict between jus cogens rules forming
part of the law of armed conflict and according immunity to Germany.
Since jus cogens rules always prevail over any inconsistent rule of international law, whether contained in a treaty or in customary international
law, so the argument runs, and since the rule which accords one State
immunity before the courts of another does not have the status of jus
cogens, the rule of immunity must give way.
93. This argument therefore depends upon the existence of a conflict
between a rule, or rules, of jus cogens, and the rule of customary law
which requires one State to accord immunity to another. In the opinion
of the Court, however, no such conflict exists. Assuming for this purpose
that the rules of the law of armed conflict which prohibit the murder of
civilians in occupied territory, the deportation of civilian inhabitants to
slave labour and the deportation of prisoners of war to slave labour are
rules of jus cogens, there is no conflict between those rules and the rules
on State immunity. The two sets of rules address different matters. The
rules of State immunity are procedural in character and are confined to
determining whether or not the courts of one State may exercise jurisdiction in respect of another State. They do not bear upon the question
whether or not the conduct in respect of which the proceedings are
brought was lawful or unlawful. That is why the application of the contemporary law of State immunity to proceedings concerning events which
occurred in 1943-1945 does not infringe the principle that law should not
be applied retrospectively to determine matters of legality and responsibility (as the Court has explained in paragraph 58 above). For the same
reason, recognizing the immunity of a foreign State in accordance with
customary international law does not amount to recognizing as lawful a
situation created by the breach of a jus cogens rule, or rendering aid and
assistance in maintaining that situation, and so cannot contravene the
principle in Article 41 of the International Law Commission’s Articles on
State Responsibility.
94. In the present case, the violation of the rules prohibiting murder,
deportation and slave labour took place in the period 1943-1945. The
illegality of these acts is openly acknowledged by all concerned. The
application of rules of State immunity to determine whether or not the
Italian courts have jurisdiction to hear claims arising out of those violations cannot involve any conflict with the rules which were violated. Nor
is the argument strengthened by focusing upon the duty of the wrongdoing State to make reparation, rather than upon the original wrongful act.
The duty to make reparation is a rule which exists independently of those
rules which concern the means by which it is to be effected. The law of
45
6 CIJ1031.indb 87 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 46]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 141
State immunity concerns only the latter ; a decision that a foreign State is
immune no more conflicts with the duty to make reparation than it does
with the rule prohibiting the original wrongful act. Moreover, against the
background of a century of practice in which almost every peace treaty or
post-war settlement has involved either a decision not to require the payment of reparations or the use of lump sum settlements and set-offs, it is
difficult to see that international law contains a rule requiring the payment of full compensation to each and every individual victim as a rule
accepted by the international community of States as a whole as one from
which no derogation is permitted.
95. To the extent that it is argued that no rule which is not of the status
of jus cogens may be applied if to do so would hinder the enforcement of
a jus cogens rule, even in the absence of a direct conflict, the Court sees no
basis for such a proposition. A jus cogens rule is one from which no derogation is permitted but the rules which determine the scope and extent of
jurisdiction and when that jurisdiction may be exercised do not derogate
from those substantive rules which possess jus cogens status, nor is there
anything inherent in the concept of jus cogens which would require their
modification or would displace their application. The Court has taken
that approach in two cases, notwithstanding that the effect was that a
means by which a jus cogens rule might be enforced was rendered unavailable. In Armed Activities, it held that the fact that a rule has the status of
jus cogens does not confer upon the Court a jurisdiction which it would
not otherwise possess (Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo
(New Application : 2002) (Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Rwanda),
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2006, p. 32,
para. 64, and p. 52, para. 125). In Arrest Warrant, the Court held, albeit
without express reference to the concept of jus cogens, that the fact that a
Minister for Foreign Affairs was accused of criminal violations of rules
which undoubtedly possess the character of jus cogens did not deprive the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of the entitlement which it possessed
as a matter of customary international law to demand immunity on his
behalf (Arrest Warrant of 11 April 2000 (Democratic Republic of the Congo
v. Belgium), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2002, p. 24, para. 58, and p. 33,
para. 78). The Court considers that the same reasoning is applicable
to the application of the customary international law regarding the immunity of one State from proceedings in the courts of another.
96. In addition, this argument about the effect of jus cogens displacing
the law of State immunity has been rejected by the national courts of the
United Kingdom (Jones v. Saudi Arabia, House of Lords, [2007] 1 AC
270 ; ILR, Vol. 129, p. 629), Canada (Bouzari v. Islamic Republic of Iran,
Court of Appeal of Ontario, DLR, 4th Series, Vol. 243, p. 406 ; ILR,
Vol. 128, p. 586), Poland (Natoniewski, Supreme Court, Polish Yearbook
of International Law, Vol. XXX, 2010, p. 299), Slovenia (case No. Up-13/99,
Constitutional Court of Slovenia), New Zealand (Fang v. Jiang, High
Court, [2007] NZAR, p. 420 ; ILR, Vol. 141, p. 702) and Greece (Margel‑
46
6 CIJ1031.indb 89 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 47]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 142
los, Special Supreme Court, ILR, Vol. 129, p. 525), as well as by the
European Court of Human Rights in Al‑Adsani v. United Kingdom and
Kalogeropoulou and Others v. Greece and Germany (which are discussed in
paragraph 90 above), in each case after careful consideration. The Court
does not consider the judgment of the French Cour de cassation of
9 March 2011 in La Réunion aérienne v. Libyan Arab Jamahiriya (case
No. 09-14743, 9 March 2011, Bull. civ., March 2011, No. 49, p. 49) as
supporting a different conclusion. The Cour de cassation in that case
stated only that, even if a jus cogens norm could constitute a legitimate
restriction on State immunity, such a restriction could not be justified on
the facts of that case. It follows, therefore, that the judgments of the Italian courts which are the subject of the present proceedings are the only
decisions of national courts to have accepted the reasoning on which this
part of Italy’s second argument is based. Moreover, none of the national
legislation on State immunity considered in paragraphs 70-71 above, has
limited immunity in cases where violations of jus cogens are alleged.
97. Accordingly, the Court concludes that even on the assumption that
the proceedings in the Italian courts involved violations of jus cogens
rules, the applicability of the customary international law on State immunity was not affected.
C. The “last resort” argument
98. The third and final strand of the Italian argument is that the Italian
courts were justified in denying Germany the immunity to which it would
otherwise have been entitled, because all other attempts to secure compensation for the various groups of victims involved in the Italian proceedings had failed. Germany’s response is that in the aftermath of the
Second World War it made considerable financial and other sacrifices by
way of reparation in the context of a complex series of inter-State arrangements under which, reflecting the economic realities of the time, no Allied
State received compensation for the full extent of the losses which its
people had suffered. It also points to the payments which it made to Italy
under the terms of the two 1961 Agreements and to the payments made
more recently under the 2000 Federal Law to various Italians who had
been unlawfully deported to forced labour in Germany. Italy maintains,
however, that large numbers of Italian victims were nevertheless left without any compensation.
*
99. The Court notes that Germany has taken significant steps to ensure
47
6 CIJ1031.indb 91 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 48]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 143
that a measure of reparation was made to Italian victims of war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Nevertheless, Germany decided to exclude
from the scope of its national compensation scheme most of the claims by
Italian military internees on the ground that prisoners of war were not
entitled to compensation for forced labour (see paragraph 26 above). The
overwhelming majority of Italian military internees were, in fact, denied
treatment as prisoners of war by the Nazi authorities. Notwithstanding
that history, in 2001 the German Government determined that those
internees were ineligible for compensation because they had had a legal
entitlement to prisoner-of-war status. The Court considers that it is a
matter of surprise — and regret — that Germany decided to deny compensation to a group of victims on the ground that they had been entitled
to a status which, at the relevant time, Germany had refused to recognize,
particularly since those victims had thereby been denied the legal protection to which that status entitled them.
100. Moreover, as the Court has said, albeit in the different context of
the immunity of State officials from criminal proceedings, the fact that
immunity may bar the exercise of jurisdiction in a particular case does not
alter the applicability of the substantive rules of international law (Arrest
Warrant of 11 April 2000 (Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Belgium),
Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2002, p. 25, para. 60 ; see also Certain Questions
of Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters (Djibouti v. France), Judgment,
I.C.J. Reports 2008, p. 244, para. 196). In that context, the Court would
point out that whether a State is entitled to immunity before the courts of
another State is a question entirely separate from whether the international responsibility of that State is engaged and whether it has an obligation to make reparation.
101. That notwithstanding, the Court cannot accept Italy’s contention
that the alleged shortcomings in Germany’s provisions for reparation to
Italian victims entitled the Italian courts to deprive Germany of jurisdictional immunity. The Court can find no basis in the State practice from
which customary international law is derived that international law makes
the entitlement of a State to immunity dependent upon the existence of
effective alternative means of securing redress. Neither in the national legislation on the subject, nor in the jurisprudence of the national courts
which have been faced with objections based on immunity, is there any
evidence that entitlement to immunity is subjected to such a precondition.
States also did not include any such condition in either the European
Convention or the United Nations Convention.
102. Moreover, the Court cannot fail to observe that the application of
any such condition, if it indeed existed, would be exceptionally difficult in
practice, particularly in a context such as that of the present case, when
claims have been the subject of extensive intergovernmental discussion. If
one follows the Italian argument, while such discussions were still ongoing
48
6 CIJ1031.indb 93 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 49]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 144
and had a prospect of achieving a successful outcome, then it seems that
immunity would still prevail, whereas, again according to this argument,
immunity would presumably cease to apply at some point when prospects
for an inter-State settlement were considered to have disappeared. Yet
national courts in one of the countries concerned are unlikely to be well
placed to determine when that point has been reached. Moreover, if a lump
sum settlement has been made — which has been the normal practice in the
aftermath of war, as Italy recognizes — then the determination of whether
a particular claimant continued to have an entitlement to compensation
would entail an investigation by the court of the details of that settlement
and the manner in which the State which had received funds (in this case
the State in which the court in question is located) has distributed those
funds. Where the State receiving funds as part of what was intended as a
comprehensive settlement in the aftermath of an armed conflict has elected
to use those funds to rebuild its national economy and infrastructure,
rather than distributing them to individual victims amongst its nationals, it
is difficult to see why the fact that those individuals had not received a
share in the money should be a reason for entitling them to claim against
the State that had transferred money to their State of nationality.
103. The Court therefore rejects Italy’s argument that Germany could
be refused immunity on this basis.
104. In coming to this conclusion, the Court is not unaware that the
immunity from jurisdiction of Germany in accordance with international
law may preclude judicial redress for the Italian nationals concerned.
It considers however that the claims arising from the treatment of the
Italian military internees referred to in paragraph 99, together with other
claims of Italian nationals which have allegedly not been settled — and
which formed the basis for the Italian proceedings — could be the subject
of further negotiation involving the two States concerned, with a view to
resolving the issue.
D. The combined effect of the circumstances relied upon by Italy
105. In the course of the oral proceedings, counsel for Italy maintained
that the three strands of Italy’s second argument had to be viewed
together ; it was because of the cumulative effect of the gravity of the violations, the status of the rules violated and the absence of alternative
means of redress that the Italian courts had been justified in refusing to
accord immunity to Germany.
106. The Court has already held that none of the three strands of the
second Italian argument would, of itself, justify the action of the Italian
courts. It is not persuaded that they would have that effect if taken
together. Nothing in the examination of State practice lends support to
the proposition that the concurrent presence of two, or even all three, of
these elements would justify the refusal by a national court to accord to a
respondent State the immunity to which it would otherwise be entitled.
49
6 CIJ1031.indb 95 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 50]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 145
In so far as the argument based on the combined effect of the circumstances is to be understood as meaning that the national court should
balance the different factors, assessing the respective weight, on the one
hand, of the various circumstances that might justify the exercise of its
jurisdiction, and, on the other hand, of the interests attaching to the protection of immunity, such an approach would disregard the very nature
of State immunity. As explained in paragraph 56 above, according to
international law, State immunity, where it exists, is a right of the foreign
State. In addition, as explained in paragraph 82 of this Judgment, national
courts have to determine questions of immunity at the outset of the proceedings, before consideration of the merits. Immunity cannot, therefore,
be made dependent upon the outcome of a balancing exercise of the specific circumstances of each case to be conducted by the national court
before which immunity is claimed.
4. Conclusions
107. The Court therefore holds that the action of the Italian courts in
denying Germany the immunity to which the Court has held it was entitled under customary international law constitutes a breach of the obligations owed by the Italian State to Germany.
108. It is, therefore, unnecessary for the Court to consider a number of
questions which were discussed at some length by the Parties. In particular, the Court need not rule on whether, as Italy contends, international
law confers upon the individual victim of a violation of the law of armed
conflict a directly enforceable right to claim compensation. Nor need it
rule on whether, as Germany maintains, Article 77, paragraph 4, of the
Treaty of Peace or the provisions of the 1961 Agreements amounted to a
binding waiver of the claims which are the subject of the Italian proceedings. That is not to say, of course, that these are unimportant questions,
only that they are not ones which fall for decision within the limits of the
present case. The question whether Germany still has a responsibility
towards Italy, or individual Italians, in respect of war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed by it during the Second World War does not
affect Germany’s entitlement to immunity. Similarly, the Court’s ruling
on the issue of immunity can have no effect on whatever responsibility
Germany may have.
IV. The Measures of Constraint Taken against Property
Belonging to Germany Located on Italian Territory
109. On 7 June 2007, certain Greek claimants, in reliance on a decision
of the Florence Court of Appeal of 13 June 2006, declaring enforceable in
50
6 CIJ1031.indb 97 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 51]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 146
Italy the judgment rendered by the Court of First Instance of Livadia, in
Greece, which had ordered Germany to pay them compensation, entered
in the Land Registry of the Province of Como a legal charge against Villa
Vigoni, a property of the German State located near Lake Como (see
above, paragraph 35).
110. Germany argued before the Court that such a measure of constraint violates the immunity from enforcement to which it is entitled
under international law. Italy has not sought to justify that measure ; on
the contrary, it indicated to the Court that it “has no objection to any
decision by the Court obliging Italy to ensure that the mortgage on Villa
Vigoni inscribed at the land registry is cancelled”.
111. As a result of Decree-Law No. 63 of 28 April 2010, Law No. 98 of
23 June 2010 and Decree-Law No. 216 of 29 December 2011, the charge in
question was suspended in order to take account of the pending proceedings
before the Court in the present case. It has not, however, been cancelled.
112. The Court considers that, notwithstanding the above-mentioned
suspension, and the absence of any argument by Italy seeking to establish
the international legality of the measures of constraint in question, a dispute still exists between the Parties on this issue, the subject of which has
not disappeared. Italy has not formally admitted that the legal charge on
Villa Vigoni constituted a measure contrary to its international obligations. Nor, as just stated, has it put an end to the effects of that measure,
but has merely suspended them. It has told the Court, through its Agent,
that the decisions of the Italian courts rendered against Germany have
been suspended by legislation pending the decision of this Court, and that
execution of those decisions “will only occur should the Court decide that
Italy has not committed the wrongful acts complained of by Germany”.
That implies that the charge on Villa Vigoni might be reactivated, should
the Court conclude that it is not contrary to international law. Without
asking the Court to reach such a conclusion, Italy does not exclude it, and
awaits the Court’s ruling before taking the appropriate action thereon.
It follows that the Court should rule, as both Parties wish it to do, on
the second of Germany’s submissions, which concerns the dispute over
the measure of constraint taken against Villa Vigoni.
113. Before considering whether the claims of the Applicant on this
point are well-founded, the Court observes that the immunity from
enforcement enjoyed by States in regard to their property situated on foreign territory goes further than the jurisdictional immunity enjoyed by
those same States before foreign courts. Even if a judgment has been lawfully rendered against a foreign State, in circumstances such that the latter could not claim immunity from jurisdiction, it does not follow ipso
facto that the State against which judgment has been given can be the
subject of measures of constraint on the territory of the forum State or on
that of a third State, with a view to enforcing the judgment in question.
Similarly, any waiver by a State of its jurisdictional immunity before a
51
6 CIJ1031.indb 99 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 52]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 147
foreign court does not in itself mean that that State has waived its immunity from enforcement as regards property belonging to it situated in foreign territory.
The rules of customary international law governing immunity from
enforcement and those governing jurisdictional immunity (understood
stricto sensu as the right of a State not to be the subject of judicial proceedings in the courts of another State) are distinct, and must be applied
separately.
114. In the present case, this means that the Court may rule on the
issue of whether the charge on Villa Vigoni constitutes a measure of constraint in violation of Germany’s immunity from enforcement, without
needing to determine whether the decisions of the Greek courts awarding
pecuniary damages against Germany, for purposes of whose enforcement
that measure was taken, were themselves in breach of that State’s jurisdictional immunity.
Likewise, the issue of the international legality of the measure of constraint in question, in light of the rules applicable to immunity from
enforcement, is separate — and may therefore be considered separately —
from that of the international legality, under the rules applicable to jurisdictional immunity, of the decisions of the Italian courts which declared
enforceable on Italian territory the Greek judgments against Germany.
This latter question, which is the subject of the third of the submissions
presented to the Court by Germany (see above paragraph 17), will be
addressed in the following section of this Judgment.
115. In support of its claim on the point under discussion here, Germany cited the rules set out in Article 19 of the United Nations Convention. That Convention has not entered into force, but in Germany’s view
it codified, in relation to the issue of immunity from enforcement, the
existing rules under general international law. Its terms are therefore said
to be binding, inasmuch as they reflect customary law on the matter.
116. Article 19, entitled “State immunity from post-judgment measures
of constraint”, reads as follows :
“No post-judgment measures of constraint, such as attachment,
arrest or execution, against property of a State may be taken in connection with a proceeding before a court of another State unless and
except to the extent that :
(a) the State has expressly consented to the taking of such measures
as indicated :
(i) by international agreement ;
(ii) by an arbitration agreement or in a written contract ; or
(iii) by a declaration before the court or by a written communication after a dispute between the parties has arisen ; or
(b) the State has allocated or earmarked property for the satisfaction
of the claim which is the object of that proceeding ; or
52
6 CIJ1031.indb 101 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 53]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 148
(c) it has been established that the property is specifically in use or
intended for use by the State for other than government non-commercial purposes and is in the territory of the State of the
forum, provided that post-judgment measures of constraint may
only be taken against property that has a connection with the
entity against which the proceeding was directed.”
117. When the United Nations Convention was being drafted, these
provisions gave rise to long and difficult discussions. The Court considers
that it is unnecessary for purposes of the present case for it to decide
whether all aspects of Article 19 reflect current customary international
law.
118. Indeed, it suffices for the Court to find that there is at least one
condition that has to be satisfied before any measure of constraint may be
taken against property belonging to a foreign State : that the property in
question must be in use for an activity not pursuing government non-commercial purposes, or that the State which owns the property has expressly
consented to the taking of a measure of constraint, or that that State has
allocated the property in question for the satisfaction of a judicial claim
(an illustration of this well-established practice is provided by the decision of the German Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht) of
14 December 1977 (BVerfGE, Vol. 46, p. 342 ; ILR, Vol. 65, p. 146), by the
judgment of the Swiss Federal Tribunal of 30 April 1986 in Kingdom of
Spain v. Société X (Annuaire suisse de droit international, Vol. 43, 1987,
p. 158 ; ILR, Vol. 82, p. 44), as well as the judgment of the House of Lords
of 12 April 1984 in Alcom Ltd. v. Republic of Colombia ([1984] 1 AC 580 ;
ILR, Vol. 74, p. 170) and the judgment of the Spanish Constitutional
Court of 1 July 1992 in Abbott v. Republic of South Africa (Revista espa‑
ñola de derecho internacional, Vol. 44, 1992, p. 565 ; ILR, Vol. 113, p. 414)).
119. It is clear in the present case that the property which was the subject of the measure of constraint at issue is being used for governmental
purposes that are entirely non-commercial, and hence for purposes falling
within Germany’s sovereign functions. Villa Vigoni is in fact the seat of a
cultural centre intended to promote cultural exchanges between Germany
and Italy. This cultural centre is organized and administered on the basis
of an agreement between the two Governments concluded in the form of
an exchange of notes dated 21 April 1986. Before the Court, Italy
described the activities in question as a “centre of excellence for the Italian-German co-operation in the fields of research, culture and education”, and recognized that Italy was directly involved in “its peculiar
bi-national . . . managing structure”. Nor has Germany in any way
expressly consented to the taking of a measure such as the legal charge in
question, or allocated Villa Vigoni for the satisfaction of the judicial
claims against it.
120. In these circumstances, the Court finds that the registration of a
legal charge on Villa Vigoni constitutes a violation by Italy of its obligation to respect the immunity owed to Germany.
53
6 CIJ1031.indb 103 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 54]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 149
V. The Decisions of the Italian Courts Declaring Enforceable
in Italy Decisions of Greek Courts Upholding
Civil Claims against Germany
121. In its third submission, Germany complains that its jurisdictional
immunity was also violated by decisions of the Italian courts declaring
enforceable in Italy judgments rendered by Greek courts against Germany in proceedings arising out of the Distomo massacre. In 1995, successors in title of the victims of that massacre, committed by the German
armed forces in a Greek village in June 1944, brought proceedings for
compensation against Germany before the Greek courts. By a judgment
of 25 September 1997, the Court of First Instance of Livadia, which had
territorial jurisdiction, ordered Germany to pay compensation to the
claimants. The appeal by Germany against that judgment was dismissed
by a decision of the Hellenic Supreme Court of 4 May 2000, which rendered final the judgment of the Court of First Instance, and at the same
time ordered Germany to pay the costs of the appeal proceedings. The
successful Greek claimants under the first-instance and Supreme Court
judgments applied to the Italian courts for exequatur of those judgments,
so as to be able to have them enforced in Italy, since it was impossible to
enforce them in Greece or in Germany (see above, paragraphs 30 and 32).
It was on those applications that the Florence Court of Appeal ruled,
allowing them by a decision of 13 June 2006, which was confirmed, following an objection by Germany, on 21 October 2008 as regards the
pecuniary damages awarded by the Court of First Instance of Livadia,
and by a decision of 2 May 2005, confirmed, following an objection by
Germany, on 6 February 2007 as regards the award of costs made by the
Hellenic Supreme Court. This latter decision was confirmed by the Italian
Court of Cassation on 6 May 2008. As regards the decision confirming
the exequatur granted in respect of the judgment of the Court of First
Instance of Livadia, it has also been appealed to the Italian Court of Cassation, which dismissed that appeal on 12 January 2011.
122. According to Germany, the decisions of the Florence Court of
Appeal declaring enforceable the judgments of the Livadia court and the
Hellenic Supreme Court constitute violations of its jurisdictional immunity, since, for the same reasons as those invoked by Germany in relation
to the Italian proceedings concerning war crimes committed in Italy
between 1943 and 1945, the decisions of the Greek courts were themselves
rendered in violation of that jurisdictional immunity.
123. According to Italy, on the contrary, and for the same reasons as
those set out and discussed in Section III of the present Judgment, there
was no violation of Germany’s jurisdictional immunity, either by the
decisions of the Greek courts or by those of the Italian courts which
declared them enforceable in Italy.
124. It should first be noted that the claim in Germany’s third submission is entirely separate and distinct from that set out in the preceding
54
6 CIJ1031.indb 105 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 55]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 150
one, which has been discussed in Section IV above (paragraphs 109 to
120). The Court is no longer concerned here to determine whether a measure of constraint — such as the legal charge on Villa Vigoni — violated
Germany’s immunity from enforcement, but to decide whether the Italian
judgments declaring enforceable in Italy the pecuniary awards pronounced in Greece did themselves — independently of any subsequent
measure of enforcement — constitute a violation of the Applicant’s
immunity from jurisdiction. While there is a link between these two
aspects — since the measure of constraint against Villa Vigoni could only
have been imposed on the basis of the judgment of the Florence Court of
Appeal according exequatur in respect of the judgment of the Greek court
in Livadia — the two issues nonetheless remain clearly distinct. That discussed in the preceding section related to immunity from enforcement ;
that which the Court will now consider addresses immunity from jurisdiction. As recalled above, these two forms of immunity are governed by
different sets of rules.
125. The Court will then explain how it views the issue of jurisdictional
immunity in relation to a judgment which rules not on the merits of a
claim brought against a foreign State, but on an application to have a
judgment rendered by a foreign court against a third State declared
enforceable on the territory of the State of the court where that application is brought (a request for exequatur). The difficulty arises from the
fact that, in such cases, the court is not being asked to give judgment
directly against a foreign State invoking jurisdictional immunity, but to
enforce a decision already rendered by a court of another State, which is
deemed to have itself examined and applied the rules governing the jurisdictional immunity of the respondent State.
126. In the present case, the two Parties appear to have argued on the
basis that, in such a situation, the question whether the court seised of the
application for exequatur had respected the jurisdictional immunity of the
third State depended simply on whether that immunity had been respected
by the foreign court having rendered the judgment on the merits against
the third State. In other words, both Parties appeared to make the question whether or not the Florence Court of Appeal had violated Germany’s jurisdictional immunity in declaring enforceable the Livadia and
Hellenic Supreme Court decisions dependent on whether those decisions
had themselves violated the jurisdictional immunity on which Germany
had relied in its defence against the proceedings brought against it in
Greece.
127. There is nothing to prevent national courts from ascertaining,
before granting exequatur, that the foreign judgment was not rendered in
breach of the immunity of the respondent State. However, for the purposes
of the present case, the Court considers that it must address the issue from
a significantly different viewpoint. In its view, it is unnecessary, in order to
determine whether the Florence Court of Appeal violated Germany’s jurisdictional immunity, to rule on the question of whether the decisions of the
Greek courts did themselves violate that immunity — something, more-
55
6 CIJ1031.indb 107 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 56]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 151
over, which it could not do, since that would be to rule on the rights and
obligations of a State, Greece, which does not have the status of party to
the present proceedings (see Monetary Gold Removed from Rome in 1943
(Italy v. France ; United Kingdom and United States of America), Prelimi‑
nary Question, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1954, p. 32 ; East Timor (Portu‑
gal v. Australia), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1995, p. 105, para. 34).
The relevant question, from the Court’s point of view and for the purposes of the present case, is whether the Italian courts did themselves
respect Germany’s immunity from jurisdiction in allowing the application
for exequatur, and not whether the Greek court having rendered the judgment of which exequatur is sought had respected Germany’s jurisdictional
immunity. In a situation of this kind, the replies to these two questions
may not necessarily be the same ; it is only the first question which the
Court needs to address here.
128. Where a court is seised, as in the present case, of an application
for exequatur of a foreign judgment against a third State, it is itself being
called upon to exercise its jurisdiction in respect of the third State in question. It is true that the purpose of exequatur proceedings is not to decide
on the merits of a dispute, but simply to render an existing judgment
enforceable on the territory of a State other than that of the court which
ruled on the merits. It is thus not the role of the exequatur court to
re-examine in all its aspects the substance of the case which has been
decided. The fact nonetheless remains that, in granting or refusing exe‑
quatur, the court exercises a jurisdictional power which results in the foreign judgment being given effects corresponding to those of a judgment
rendered on the merits in the requested State. The proceedings brought
before that court must therefore be regarded as being conducted against
the third State which was the subject of the foreign judgment.
129. In this regard, the Court notes that, under the terms of Article 6,
paragraph 2, of the United Nations Convention :
“A proceeding before a court of a State shall be considered to have
been instituted against another State if that other State :
(a) is named as a party to that proceeding ; or
(b) is not named as a party to the proceeding but the proceeding in
effect seeks to affect the property, rights, interests or activities of
that other State.”
When applied to exequatur proceedings, that definition means that such
proceedings must be regarded as being directed against the State which was
the subject of the foreign judgment. That is indeed why Germany was entitled to object to the decisions of the Florence Court of Appeal granting
exequatur — although it did so without success — and to appeal to the Italian Court of Cassation against the judgments confirming those decisions.
130. It follows from the foregoing that the court seised of an application
for exequatur of a foreign judgment rendered against a third State has to
ask itself whether the respondent State enjoys immunity from jurisdiction — having regard to the nature of the case in which that judgment was
56
6 CIJ1031.indb 109 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 57]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 152
given — before the courts of the State in which exequatur proceedings have
been instituted. In other words, it has to ask itself whether, in the event
that it had itself been seised of the merits of a dispute identical to that
which was the subject of the foreign judgment, it would have been obliged
under international law to accord immunity to the respondent State (see
to this effect the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada in Kuwait
Airways Corp. v. Iraq ([2010] SCR, Vol. 2, p. 571), and the judgment of
the United Kingdom Supreme Court in NML Capital Limited v. Republic
of Argentina ([2011] UKSC 31).
131. In light of this reasoning, it follows that the Italian courts which
declared enforceable in Italy the decisions of Greek courts rendered against
Germany have violated the latter’s immunity. For the reasons set out in
Section III above of the present Judgment, the Italian courts would have
been obliged to grant immunity to Germany if they had been seised of the
merits of a case identical to that which was the subject of the decisions of
the Greek courts which it was sought to declare enforceable (namely, the
case of the Distomo massacre). Accordingly, they could not grant exequa‑
tur without thereby violating Germany’s jurisdictional immunity.
132. In order to reach such a decision, it is unnecessary to rule on the
question whether the Greek courts did themselves violate Germany’s
immunity, a question which is not before the Court, and on which, moreover, it cannot rule, for the reasons recalled earlier. The Court will confine itself to noting, in general terms, that it may perfectly well happen, in
certain circumstances, that the judgment rendered on the merits did not
violate the jurisdictional immunity of the respondent State, for example
because the latter had waived its immunity before the courts hearing the
case on the merits, but that the exequatur proceedings instituted in
another State are barred by the respondent’s immunity. That is why the
two issues are distinct, and why it is not for this Judgment to rule on the
legality of the decisions of the Greek courts.
133. The Court accordingly concludes that the above-mentioned decisions of the Florence Court of Appeal constitute a violation by Italy of its
obligation to respect the jurisdictional immunity of Germany.
VI. Germany’s Final Submissions
and the Remedies Sought
134. In its final submissions at the close of the oral proceedings, Germany presented six requests to the Court, of which the first three were
declaratory and the final three sought to draw the consequences, in terms
of reparation, of the established violations (see paragraph 17 above). It is
on those requests that the Court is required to rule in the operative part
of this Judgment.
135. For the reasons set out in Sections III, IV and V above, the Court
will uphold Germany’s first three requests, which ask it to declare, in
57
6 CIJ1031.indb 111 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 58]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 153
turn, that Italy has violated the jurisdictional immunity which Germany
enjoys under international law by allowing civil claims based on violations of international humanitarian law by the German Reich between
1943 and 1945 ; that Italy has also committed violations of the immunity
owed to Germany by taking enforcement measures against Villa Vigoni ;
and, lastly, that Italy has violated Germany’s immunity by declaring
enforceable in Italy Greek judgments based on occurrences similar to
those referred to above.
136. In its fourth submission, Germany asks the Court to adjudge and
declare that, in view of the above, Italy’s international responsibility is
engaged.
There is no doubt that the violation by Italy of certain of its international legal obligations entails its international responsibility and places
upon it, by virtue of general international law, an obligation to make full
reparation for the injury caused by the wrongful acts committed. The
substance, in the present case, of that obligation to make reparation will
be considered below, in connection with Germany’s fifth and sixth submissions. The Court’s ruling thereon will be set out in the operative
clause. On the other hand, the Court does not consider it necessary to
include an express declaration in the operative clause that Italy’s international responsibility is engaged ; to do so would be entirely redundant,
since that responsibility is automatically inferred from the finding that
certain obligations have been violated.
137. In its fifth submission, Germany asks the Court to order Italy to
take, by means of its own choosing, any and all steps to ensure that all
the decisions of its courts and other judicial authorities infringing Germany’s sovereign immunity become unenforceable. This is to be understood as implying that the relevant decisions should cease to have effect.
According to general international law on the responsibility of States
for internationally wrongful acts, as expressed in this respect by Article 30 (a) of the International Law Commission’s Articles on the subject,
the State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an obligation to cease that act, if it is continuing. Furthermore, even if the act in
question has ended, the State responsible is under an obligation to
re-establish, by way of reparation, the situation which existed before the
wrongful act was committed, provided that re-establishment is not materially impossible and that it does not involve a burden for that State out
of all proportion to the benefit deriving from restitution instead of compensation. This rule is reflected in Article 35 of the International Law
Commission’s Articles.
It follows accordingly that the Court must uphold Germany’s fifth submission. The decisions and measures infringing Germany’s jurisdictional
immunities which are still in force must cease to have effect, and the
58
6 CIJ1031.indb 113 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 59]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 154
effects which have already been produced by those decisions and measures must be reversed, in such a way that the situation which existed
before the wrongful acts were committed is re-established. It has not been
alleged or demonstrated that restitution would be materially impossible
in this case, or that it would involve a burden for Italy out of all proportion to the benefit deriving from it. In particular, the fact that some of the
violations may have been committed by judicial organs, and some of the
legal decisions in question have become final in Italian domestic law, does
not lift the obligation incumbent upon Italy to make restitution. On the
other hand, the Respondent has the right to choose the means it considers
best suited to achieve the required result. Thus, the Respondent is under
an obligation to achieve this result by enacting appropriate legislation or
by resorting to other methods of its choosing having the same effect.
138. Finally, in its sixth submission, Germany asks the Court to order
Italy to take any and all steps to ensure that in the future Italian courts
do not entertain legal actions against Germany founded on the occurrences described in its first submission (namely violations of international
humanitarian law committed by the German Reich between 1943
and 1945).
As the Court has stated in previous cases (see, in particular, Dispute
regarding Navigational and Related Rights (Costa Rica v. Nicaragua),
Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2009, p. 267, para. 150), as a general rule, there
is no reason to suppose that a State whose act or conduct has been
declared wrongful by the Court will repeat that act or conduct in the
future, since its good faith must be presumed. Accordingly, while the
Court may order the State responsible for an internationally wrongful act
to offer assurances of non-repetition to the injured State, or to take specific measures to ensure that the wrongful act is not repeated, it may only
do so when there are special circumstances which justify this, which the
Court must assess on a case-by-case basis.
In the present case, the Court has no reason to believe that such circumstances exist. Therefore, it will not uphold the last of Germany’s final
submissions.
*
* *
139. For these reasons,
The Court,
(1) By twelve votes to three,
Finds that the Italian Republic has violated its obligation to respect the
immunity which the Federal Republic of Germany enjoys under interna-
59
6 CIJ1031.indb 115 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 60]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 155
tional law by allowing civil claims to be brought against it based on violations of international humanitarian law committed by the German Reich
between 1943 and 1945 ;
in favour : President Owada ; Vice‑President Tomka ; Judges Koroma, Simma,
Abraham, Keith, Sepúlveda-Amor, Bennouna, Skotnikov, Greenwood,
Xue, Donoghue ;
against : Judges Cançado Trindade, Yusuf ; Judge ad hoc Gaja ;
(2) By fourteen votes to one,
Finds that the Italian Republic has violated its obligation to respect the
immunity which the Federal Republic of Germany enjoys under international law by taking measures of constraint against Villa Vigoni ;
in favour : President Owada ; Vice‑President Tomka ; Judges Koroma,
Simma, Abraham, Keith, Sepúlveda-Amor, Bennouna, Skotnikov, Yusuf,
Greenwood, Xue, Donoghue ; Judge ad hoc Gaja ;
against : Judge Cançado Trindade ;
(3) By fourteen votes to one,
Finds that the Italian Republic has violated its obligation to respect the
immunity which the Federal Republic of Germany enjoys under international law by declaring enforceable in Italy decisions of Greek courts
based on violations of international humanitarian law committed in
Greece by the German Reich ;
in favour : President Owada ; Vice‑President Tomka ; Judges Koroma,
Simma, Abraham, Keith, Sepúlveda-Amor, Bennouna, Skotnikov, Yusuf,
Greenwood, Xue, Donoghue ; Judge ad hoc Gaja ;
against : Judge Cançado Trindade ;
(4) By fourteen votes to one,
Finds that the Italian Republic must, by enacting appropriate legislation, or by resorting to other methods of its choosing, ensure that the
decisions of its courts and those of other judicial authorities infringing the
immunity which the Federal Republic of Germany enjoys under international law cease to have effect ;
in favour : President Owada ; Vice‑President Tomka ; Judges Koroma,
Simma, Abraham, Keith, Sepúlveda-Amor, Bennouna, Skotnikov, Yusuf,
Greenwood, Xue, Donoghue ; Judge ad hoc Gaja ;
against : Judge Cançado Trindade ;
(5) Unanimously,
Rejects all other submissions made by the Federal Republic of Germany.
Done in French and in English, the French text being authoritative, at
the Peace Palace, The Hague, this third day of February, two thousand
60
6 CIJ1031.indb 117 22/11/13 12:25

[Source edition page 61]

jurisdictional immunities of the state (judgment) 156
and twelve, in four copies, one of which will be placed in the archives of
the Court and the others transmitted to the Government of the Federal
Republic of Germany, the Government of the Italian Republic and the
Government of the Hellenic Republic, respectively.
(Signed) Hisashi Owada,
President.
(Signed) Philippe Couvreur,
Registrar.
Judges Koroma, Keith and Bennouna append separate opinions to
the Judgment of the Court ; Judges Cançado Trindade and Yusuf
append dissenting opinions to the Judgment of the Court ; Judge ad hoc
Gaja appends a dissenting opinion to the Judgment of the Court.
(Initialled) H.O.
(Initialled) Ph.C.
61
6 CIJ1031.indb 119 22/11/13 12:25
