ILIA NORMALIZED LEGAL TEXT

Document ID: gc-ii-1949
Title: Geneva Convention II of 12 August 1949
Chinese title: 1949年日内瓦第二公约
Issuing body: International Committee of the Red Cross
Official source: https://www.icrc.org/sites/default/files/external/doc/en/assets/files/publications/icrc-002-0173.pdf
Database version: public-international-law-v1.0.1-normalized-2026.09.24

NOTICE
This is an ILIA-generated normalized text for offline legal research.
It is not an official edition. Source-edition page markers are retained
only as factual verification locators. Verify quotations against the
official source linked above.

========================================================================

[Source edition page 65]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 61
GENEVA CONVENTION
for the aMelioration of the condition of Wounded, sick and
shiPWrecked MeMbers of arMed forces at sea of 12 auGust 1949
The undersigned Plenipotentiaries of the Governments represented at the Diplomatic
Conference held at Geneva from April 21 to August 12, 1949, for the purpose of revising the
Xth Hague Convention of October 18, 1907 for the Adaptation to Maritime Warfare of the
Principles of the Geneva Convention of 1906, have agreed as follows:
CHAPTER I
General Provisions
Article 1
The High Contracting Parties undertake to respect and to ensure respect for Respect
the present Convention in all circumstances. for the
Convention1
Article 2
In addition to the provisions which shall be implemented in peacetime, the Application
present Convention shall apply to all cases of declared war or of any other of the
armed conflict which may arise between two or more of the High Contract- Convention
ing Parties, even if the state of war is not recognized by one of them.
The Convention shall also apply to all cases of partial or total occupation of
the territory of a High Contracting Party, even if the said occupation meets
with no armed resistance.
Although one of the Powers in conflict may not be a party to the present
Convention, the Powers who are parties thereto shall remain bound by it in
their mutual relations. They shall furthermore be bound by the Convention
in relation to the said Power, if the latter accepts and applies the provisions
thereof.
Article 3
In the case of armed conflict not of an international character occurring in Conflicts
the territory of one of the High Contracting Parties, each Party to the conflict not of an
shall be bound to apply, as a minimum, the following provisions: international
character
1) Persons taking no active part in the hostilities, including members of
armed forces who have laid down their arms and those placed hors de
combat by sickness, wounds, detention, or any other cause, shall in all
circumstances be treated humanely, without any adverse distinction
1 The marginal notes or titles of articles have been drafted by the Swiss Federal Department of
Foreign Affairs.

[Source edition page 66]

62 SECOND CONVENTION
founded on race, colour, religion or faith, sex, birth or wealth, or any
other similar criteria.
To this end, the following acts are and shall remain prohibited at any time
and in any place whatsoever with respect to the above-mentioned persons:
a) violence to life and person, in particular murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture;
b) taking of hostages;
c) outrages upon personal dignity, in particular, humiliating and degrading treatment;
d) the passing of sentences and the carrying out of executions without
previous judgment pronounced by a regularly constituted court, affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples.
2) The wounded, sick and shipwrecked shall be collected and cared for.
An impartial humanitarian body, such as the International Committee
of the Red Cross, may offer its services to the Parties to the conflict.
The Parties to the conflict should further endeavour to bring into force,
by means of special agreements, all or part of the other provisions of the
present Convention.
The application of the preceding provisions shall not affect the legal status of the Parties to the conflict.
Article 4
Field of In case of hostilities between land and naval forces of Parties to the conflict, the
application provisions of the present Convention shall apply only to forces on board ship.
Forces put ashore shall immediately become subject to the provisions of the
Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded
and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of August 12, 1949.
Article 5
Application Neutral Powers shall apply by analogy the provisions of the present Convenby neutral tion to the wounded, sick and shipwrecked, and to members of the medical
Powers personnel and to chaplains of the armed forces of the Parties to the conflict
received or interned in their territory, as well as to dead persons found.
Article 6
Special In addition to the agreements expressly provided for in Articles 10, 18, 31, 38,
agreements 39, 40, 43 and 53, the High Contracting Parties may conclude other special
agreements for all matters concerning which they may deem it suitable to
make separate provision. No special agreement shall adversely affect the situ-

[Source edition page 67]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 63
ation of wounded, sick and shipwrecked persons, of members of the medical
personnel or of chaplains, as defined by the present Convention, nor restrict
the rights which it confers upon them.
Wounded, sick, and shipwrecked persons, as well as medical personnel and
chaplains, shall continue to have the benefit of such agreements as long as the
Convention is applicable to them, except where express provisions to the contrary are contained in the aforesaid or in subsequent agreements, or where
more favourable measures have been taken with regard to them by one or
other of the Parties to the conflict.
Article 7
Wounded, sick and shipwrecked persons, as well as members of the medical Nonpersonnel and chaplains, may in no circumstances renounce in part or in renunciation
entirety the rights secured to them by the present Convention, and by the of rights
special agreements referred to in the foregoing Article, if such there be.
Article 8
The present Convention shall be applied with the co-operation and under the Protecting
scrutiny of the Protecting Powers whose duty it is to safeguard the interests Powers
of the Parties to the conflict. For this purpose, the Protecting Powers may appoint, apart from their diplomatic or consular staff, delegates from amongst
their own nationals or the nationals of other neutral Powers. The said delegates shall be subject to the approval of the Power with which they are to
carry out their duties.
The Parties to the conflict shall facilitate to the greatest extent possible the
task of the representatives or delegates of the Protecting Powers.
The representatives or delegates of the Protecting Powers shall not in any case
exceed their mission under the present Convention. They shall, in particular,
take account of the imperative necessities of security of the State wherein they
carry out their duties. Their activities shall only be restricted as an exceptional
and temporary measure when this is rendered necessary by imperative military necessities.
Article 9
The provisions of the present Convention constitute no obstacle to the hu- Activities
manitarian activities which the International Committee of the Red Cross of the
or any other impartial humanitarian organization may, subject to the con- International
sent of the Parties to the conflict concerned, undertake for the protection of Committee
wounded, sick and shipwrecked persons, medical personnel and chaplains, of the Red
and for their relief. Cross

[Source edition page 68]

64 SECOND CONVENTION
Article 10
Substitutes The High Contracting Parties may at any time agree to entrust to an organizafor Protecting tion which offers all guarantees of impartiality and efficacy the duties incum-
Powers bent on the Protecting Powers by virtue of the present Convention.
When wounded, sick and shipwrecked, or medical personnel and chaplains
do not benefit or cease to benefit, no matter for what reason, by the activities
of a Protecting Power or of an organization provided for in the first paragraph
above, the Detaining Power shall request a neutral State, or such an organization, to undertake the functions performed under the present Convention by
a Protecting Power designated by the Parties to a conflict.
If protection cannot be arranged accordingly, the Detaining Power shall request or shall accept, subject to the provisions of this Article, the offer of the
services of a humanitarian organization, such as the International Committee
of the Red Cross, to assume the humanitarian functions performed by
Protecting Powers under the present Convention.
Any neutral Power, or any organization invited by the Power concerned or
offering itself for these purposes, shall be required to act with a sense of responsibility towards the Party to the conflict on which persons protected by
the present Convention depend, and shall be required to furnish sufficient
assurances that it is in a position to undertake the appropriate functions and
to discharge them impartially.
No derogation from the preceding provisions shall be made by special agreements between Powers one of which is restricted, even temporarily, in its
freedom to negotiate with the other Power or its allies by reason of military
events, more particularly where the whole, or a substantial part, of the territory of the said Power is occupied.
Whenever, in the present Convention, mention is made of a Protecting
Power, such mention also applies to substitute organizations in the sense of
the present Article.
Article 11
Conciliation In cases where they deem it advisable in the interest of protected persons,
procedure particularly in cases of disagreement between the Parties to the conflict as to
the application or interpretation of the provisions of the present Convention,
the Protecting Powers shall lend their good offices with a view to settling the
disagreement.
For this purpose, each of the Protecting Powers may, either at the invitation
of one Party or on its own initiative, propose to the Parties to the conflict a
meeting of their representatives, in particular of the authorities responsible
for the wounded, sick and shipwrecked, medical personnel and chaplains,
possibly on neutral territory suitably chosen. The Parties to the conflict shall

[Source edition page 69]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 65
be bound to give effect to the proposals made to them for this purpose. The
Protecting Powers may, if necessary, propose for approval by the Parties
to the conflict, a person belonging to a neutral Power or delegated by the
International Committee of the Red Cross, who shall be invited to take part
in such a meeting.
CHAPTER II
Wounded, sick and shiPWrecked
Article 12
Members of the armed forces and other persons mentioned in the following Protection
Article, who are at sea and who are wounded, sick or shipwrecked, shall be re- and care
spected and protected in all circumstances, it being understood that the term
“shipwreck” means shipwreck from any cause and includes forced landings at
sea by or from aircraft.
Such persons shall be treated humanely and cared for by the Parties to the
conflict in whose power they may be, without any adverse distinction founded on sex, race, nationality, religion, political opinions, or any other similar
criteria. Any attempts upon their lives, or violence to their persons, shall be
strictly prohibited; in particular, they shall not be murdered or exterminated,
subjected to torture or to biological experiments; they shall not wilfully be left
without medical assistance and care, nor shall conditions exposing them to
contagion or infection be created.
Only urgent medical reasons will authorize priority in the order of treatment
to be administered.
Women shall be treated with all consideration due to their sex.
Article 13
The present Convention shall apply to the wounded, sick and shipwrecked at Protected
sea belonging to the following categories: persons
1) Members of the armed forces of a Party to the conflict, as well as members of militias or volunteer corps forming part of such armed forces.
2) Members of other militias and members of other volunteer corps, including those of organized resistance movements, belonging to a Party to the
conflict and operating in or outside their own territory, even if this territory is occupied, provided that such militias or volunteer corps, including such organized resistance movements, fulfil the following conditions:
a) that of being commanded by a person responsible for his subordinates;
b) that of having a fixed distinctive sign recognizable at a distance;

[Source edition page 70]

66 SECOND CONVENTION
c) that of carrying arms openly;
d) that of conducting their operations in accordance with the laws and
customs of war.
3) Members of regular armed forces who profess allegiance to a Government or an authority not recognized by the Detaining Power.
4) Persons who accompany the armed forces without actually being members thereof, such as civilian members of military aircraft crews, war correspondents, supply contractors, members of labour units or of services
responsible for the welfare of the armed forces, provided that they have
received authorization from the armed forces which they accompany.
5) Members of crews, including masters, pilots and apprentices of the merchant marine and the crews of civil aircraft of the Parties to the conflict,
who do not benefit by more favourable treatment under any other provisions of international law.
6) Inhabitants of a non-occupied territory who, on the approach of the enemy, spontaneously take up arms to resist the invading forces, without
having had time to form themselves into regular armed units, provided
they carry arms openly and respect the laws and customs of war.
Article 14
Handing All warships of a belligerent Party shall have the right to demand that the
over to a wounded, sick or shipwrecked on board military hospital ships, and hospital
belligerent ships belonging to relief societies or to private individuals, as well as merchant
vessels, yachts and other craft shall be surrendered, whatever their nationality, provided that the wounded and sick are in a fit state to be moved and that
the warship can provide adequate facilities for necessary medical treatment.
Article 15
Wounded If wounded, sick or shipwrecked persons are taken on board a neutral wartaken on ship or a neutral military aircraft, it shall be ensured, where so required by
board a neu- international law, that they can take no further part in operations of war.
tral warship
Article 16
Wounded Subject to the provisions of Article 12, the wounded, sick and shipwrecked of
falling into a belligerent who fall into enemy hands shall be prisoners of war, and the proenemy hands visions of international law concerning prisoners of war shall apply to them.
The captor may decide, according to circumstances, whether it is expedient to
hold them, or to convey them to a port in the captor’s own country, to a neutral port or even to a port in enemy territory. In the last case, prisoners of war
thus returned to their home country may not serve for the duration of the war.

[Source edition page 71]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 67
Article 17
Wounded, sick or shipwrecked persons who are landed in neutral ports with Wounded
the consent of the local authorities, shall, failing arrangements to the contrary landed in a
between the neutral and the belligerent Powers, be so guarded by the neutral neutral port
Power, where so required by international law, that the said persons cannot
again take part in operations of war.
The costs of hospital accommodation and internment shall be borne by the
Power on whom the wounded, sick or shipwrecked persons depend.
Article 18
After each engagement, Parties to the conflict shall, without delay, take all Search for
possible measures to search for and collect the shipwrecked, wounded and casualties
sick, to protect them against pillage and ill-treatment, to ensure their ade- after an enquate care, and to search for the dead and prevent their being despoiled. gagement
Whenever circumstances permit, the Parties to the conflict shall conclude
local arrangements for the removal of the wounded and sick by sea from a
besieged or encircled area and for the passage of medical and religious personnel and equipment on their way to that area.
Article 19
The Parties to the conflict shall record as soon as possible, in respect of each Recording
shipwrecked, wounded, sick or dead person of the adverse Party falling into and fortheir hands, any particulars which may assist in his identification. These warding of
records should if possible include: information
a) designation of the Power on which he depends;
b) army, regimental, personal or serial number;
c) surname;
d) first name or names;
e) date of birth;
f) any other particulars shown on his identity card or disc;
g) date and place of capture or death;
h) particulars concerning wounds or illness, or cause of death.
As soon as possible the above-mentioned information shall be forwarded to
the Information Bureau described in Article 122 of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of August 12, 1949, which
shall transmit this information to the Power on which these persons depend through the intermediary of the Protecting Power and of the Central
Prisoners of War Agency.
Parties to the conflict shall prepare and forward to each other through the
same bureau, certificates of death or duly authenticated lists of the dead. They
shall likewise collect and forward through the same bureau one half of the

[Source edition page 72]

68 SECOND CONVENTION
double identity disc, or the identity disc itself if it is a single disc, last wills
or other documents of importance to the next of kin, money and in general
all articles of an intrinsic or sentimental value, which are found on the dead.
These articles together with unidentified articles, shall be sent in sealed packets, accompanied by statements giving all particulars necessary for the identification of the deceased owners, as well as by a complete list of the contents
of the parcel.
Article 20
Prescriptions Parties to the conflict shall ensure that burial at sea of the dead, carried out
regarding individually as far as circumstances permit, is preceded by a careful examinathe dead tion, if possible by a medical examination, of the bodies, with a view to confirming death, establishing identity and enabling a report to be made. Where
a double identity disc is used, one half of the disc should remain on the body.
If dead persons are landed, the provisions of the Geneva Convention for the
Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in
the Field of August 12, 1949, shall be applicable.
Article 21
Appeals The Parties to the conflict may appeal to the charity of commanders of neutral
to neutral merchant vessels, yachts or other craft, to take on board and care for woundvessels ed, sick or shipwrecked persons, and to collect the dead.
Vessels of any kind responding to this appeal, and those having of their own
accord collected wounded, sick or shipwrecked persons, shall enjoy special
protection and facilities to carry out such assistance.
They may, in no case, be captured on account of any such transport; but, in
the absence of any promise to the contrary, they shall remain liable to capture
for any violations of neutrality they may have committed.
CHAPTER III
hosPital shiPs
Article 22
Notification Military hospital ships, that is to say, ships built or equipped by the Powand ers specially and solely with a view to assisting the wounded, sick and shipprotection wrecked, to treating them and to transporting them, may in no circumstances
of military be attacked or captured, but shall at all times be respected and protected, on
hospital condition that their names and descriptions have been notified to the Parties
ships to the conflict ten days before those ships are employed.

[Source edition page 73]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 69
The characteristics which must appear in the notification shall include registered gross tonnage, the length from stem to stern and the number of masts
and funnels.
Article 23
Establishments ashore entitled to the protection of the Geneva Convention Protection of
for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed medical es-
Forces in the Field of August 12, 1949, shall be protected from bombardment tablishments
or attack from the sea. ashore
Article 24
Hospital ships utilized by National Red Cross Societies, by officially recognized Hospital
relief societies or by private persons shall have the same protection as military ships utilized
hospital ships and shall be exempt from capture, if the Party to the conflict on by relief
which they depend has given them an official commission and in so far as the societies
provisions of Article 22 concerning notification have been complied with. and private
individuals of
These ships must be provided with certificates from the responsible authori-
I. Parties to
ties, stating that the vessels have been under their control while fitting out
the conflict
and on departure.
Article 25
Hospital ships utilized by National Red Cross Societies, officially recognized II. Neutral
relief societies, or private persons of neutral countries shall have the same countries
protection as military hospital ships and shall be exempt from capture, on
condition that they have placed themselves under the control of one of the
Parties to the conflict, with the previous consent of their own governments
and with the authorization of the Party to the conflict concerned, in so far as
the provisions of Article 22 concerning notification have been complied with.
Article 26
The protection mentioned in Articles 22, 24 and 25 shall apply to hospital Tonnage
ships of any tonnage and to their lifeboats, wherever they are operating. Nevertheless, to ensure the maximum comfort and security, the Parties to the
conflict shall endeavour to utilize, for the transport of wounded, sick and
shipwrecked over long distances and on the high seas, only hospital ships of
over 2,000 tons gross.
Article 27
Under the same conditions as those provided for in Articles 22 and 24, small Coastal
craft employed by the State or by the officially recognized lifeboat institutions rescue craft
for coastal rescue operations, shall also be respected and protected, so far as
operational requirements permit.

[Source edition page 74]

70 SECOND CONVENTION
The same shall apply so far as possible to fixed coastal installations used exclusively by these craft for their humanitarian missions.
Article 28
Protection of Should fighting occur on board a warship, the sick-bays shall be respected
sick-bays and spared as far as possible. Sick-bays and their equipment shall remain subject to the laws of warfare, but may not be diverted from their purpose so long
as they are required for the wounded and sick. Nevertheless, the commander
into whose power they have fallen may, after ensuring the proper care of the
wounded and sick who are accommodated therein, apply them to other purposes in case of urgent military necessity.
Article 29
Hospital Any hospital ship in a port which falls into the hands of the enemy shall be
ships in occu- authorized to leave the said port.
pied ports
Article 30
Employment The vessels described in Articles 22, 24, 25 and 27 shall afford relief and assistof hospital ance to the wounded, sick and shipwrecked without distinction of nationality.
ships and
The High Contracting Parties undertake not to use these vessels for any milismall craft
tary purpose.
Such vessels shall in no wise hamper the movements of the combatants.
During and after an engagement, they will act at their own risk.
Article 31
Right of The Parties to the conflict shall have the right to control and search the vessels
control and mentioned in Articles 22, 24, 25 and 27. They can refuse assistance from these
search vessels, order them off, make them take a certain course, control the use of
their wireless and other means of communication, and even detain them for
a period not exceeding seven days from the time of interception, if the gravity
of the circumstances so requires.
They may put a commissioner temporarily on board whose sole task shall be
to see that orders given in virtue of the provisions of the preceding paragraph
are carried out.
As far as possible, the Parties to the conflict shall enter in the log of the hospital ship, in a language he can understand, the orders they have given the
captain of the vessel.
Parties to the conflict may, either unilaterally or by particular agreements, put
on board their ships neutral observers who shall verify the strict observation
of the provisions contained in the present Convention.

[Source edition page 75]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 71
Article 32
Vessels described in Articles 22, 24, 25 and 27 are not classed as warships as Stay in a
regards their stay in a neutral port. neutral port
Article 33
Merchant vessels which have been transformed into hospital ships cannot be Converted
put to any other use throughout the duration of hostilities. merchant
vessels
Article 34
The protection to which hospital ships and sick-bays are entitled shall not Discontinucease unless they are used to commit, outside their humanitarian duties, acts ance of
harmful to the enemy. Protection may, however, cease only after due warning protection
has been given, naming in all appropriate cases a reasonable time limit, and
after such warning has remained unheeded.
In particular, hospital ships may not possess or use a secret code for their
wireless or other means of communication.
Article 35
The following conditions shall not be considered as depriving hospital ships Conditions
or sick-bays of vessels of the protection due to them: not
depriving
1) The fact that the crews of ships or sick-bays are armed for the maintehospital
nance of order, for their own defence or that of the sick and wounded.
ships of
2) The presence on board of apparatus exclusively intended to facilitate protection
navigation or communication.
3) The discovery on board hospital ships or in sick-bays of portable arms
and ammunition taken from the wounded, sick and shipwrecked and
not yet handed to the proper service.
4) The fact that the humanitarian activities of hospital ships and sick-bays
of vessels or of the crews extend to the care of wounded, sick or shipwrecked civilians.
5) The transport of equipment and of personnel intended exclusively for
medical duties, over and above the normal requirements.

[Source edition page 76]

72 SECOND CONVENTION
CHAPTER IV
Personnel
Article 36
Protection of The religious, medical and hospital personnel of hospital ships and their
the person- crews shall be respected and protected; they may not be captured during the
nel of hospi- time they are in the service of the hospital ship, whether or not there are
tal ships wounded and sick on board.
Article 37
Medical and The religious, medical and hospital personnel assigned to the medical or spirreligious itual care of the persons designated in Articles 12 and 13 shall, if they fall into
personnel of the hands of the enemy, be respected and protected; they may continue to
other ships carry out their duties as long as this is necessary for the care of the wounded
and sick. They shall afterwards be sent back as soon as the Commander-in-
Chief, under whose authority they are, considers it practicable. They may take
with them, on leaving the ship, their personal property.
If, however, it proves necessary to retain some of this personnel owing to the
medical or spiritual needs of prisoners of war, everything possible shall be
done for their earliest possible landing.
Retained personnel shall be subject, on landing, to the provisions of the
Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded
and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of August 12, 1949.
CHAPTER V
Medical transPorts
Article 38
Ships used Ships chartered for that purpose shall be authorized to transport equipment
for the exclusively intended for the treatment of wounded and sick members of
conveyance armed forces or for the prevention of disease, provided that the particulars
of medical regarding their voyage have been notified to the adverse Power and approved
equipment by the latter. The adverse Power shall preserve the right to board the carrier
ships, but not to capture them or to seize the equipment carried.
By agreement amongst the Parties to the conflict, neutral observers may be
placed on board such ships to verify the equipment carried. For this purpose,
free access to the equipment shall be given.

[Source edition page 77]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 73
Article 39
Medical aircraft, that is to say, aircraft exclusively employed for the removal of Medical
wounded, sick and shipwrecked, and for the transport of medical personnel aircraft
and equipment, may not be the object of attack, but shall be respected by the
Parties to the conflict, while flying at heights, at times and on routes specifically agreed upon between the Parties to the conflict concerned.
They shall be clearly marked with the distinctive emblem prescribed in
Article 41, together with their national colours, on their lower, upper and
lateral surfaces. They shall be provided with any other markings or means of
identification which may be agreed upon between the Parties to the conflict
upon the outbreak or during the course of hostilities.
Unless agreed otherwise, flights over enemy or enemy-occupied territory are
prohibited.
Medical aircraft shall obey every summons to alight on land or water. In the
event of having thus to alight, the aircraft with its occupants may continue its
flight after examination, if any.
In the event of alighting involuntarily on land or water in enemy or enemyoccupied territory, the wounded, sick and shipwrecked, as well as the crew of
the aircraft shall be prisoners of war. The medical personnel shall be treated
according to Articles 36 and 37.
Article 40
Subject to the provisions of the second paragraph, medical aircraft of Par- Flight over
ties to the conflict may fly over the territory of neutral Powers, land thereon neutral
in case of necessity, or use it as a port of call. They shall give neutral Powers countries.
prior notice of their passage over the said territory, and obey every summons Landing of
to alight, on land or water. They will be immune from attack only when flying wounded
on routes, at heights and at times specifically agreed upon between the Parties
to the conflict and the neutral Power concerned.
The neutral Powers may, however, place conditions or restrictions on the passage or landing of medical aircraft on their territory. Such possible conditions
or restrictions shall be applied equally to all Parties to the conflict.
Unless otherwise agreed between the neutral Powers and the Parties to the
conflict, the wounded, sick or shipwrecked who are disembarked with the
consent of the local authorities on neutral territory by medical aircraft shall
be detained by the neutral Power, where so required by international law,
in such a manner that they cannot again take part in operations of war. The
cost of their accommodation and internment shall be borne by the Power on
which they depend.

[Source edition page 78]

74 SECOND CONVENTION
CHAPTER VI
the distinctive eMbleM
Article 41
Use of the Under the direction of the competent military authority, the emblem of the
emblem red cross on a white ground shall be displayed on the flags, armlets and on all
equipment employed in the Medical Service.
Nevertheless, in the case of countries which already use as emblem, in place
of the red cross, the red crescent or the red lion and sun on a white ground,
these emblems are also recognized by the terms of the present Convention.
Article 42
Identification The personnel designated in Articles 36 and 37 shall wear, affixed to the left
of medical arm, a water-resistant armlet bearing the distinctive emblem, issued and
and religious stamped by the military authority.
personnel
Such personnel, in addition to wearing the identity disc mentioned in
Article 19, shall also carry a special identity card bearing the distinctive emblem. This card shall be water-resistant and of such size that it can be carried
in the pocket. It shall be worded in the national language, shall mention at
least the surname and first names, the date of birth, the rank and the service
number of the bearer, and shall state in what capacity he is entitled to the
protection of the present Convention. The card shall bear the photograph of
the owner and also either his signature or his finger-prints or both. It shall be
embossed with the stamp of the military authority.
The identity card shall be uniform throughout the same armed forces and, as
far as possible, of a similar type in the armed forces of the High Contracting
Parties. The Parties to the conflict may be guided by the model which is annexed, by way of example, to the present Convention. They shall inform each
other, at the outbreak of hostilities, of the model they are using. Identity cards
should be made out, if possible, at least in duplicate, one copy being kept by
the home country.
In no circumstances may the said personnel be deprived of their insignia or
identity cards nor of the right to wear the armlet. In cases of loss they shall be
entitled to receive duplicates of the cards and to have the insignia replaced.
Article 43
Marking The ships designated in Articles 22, 24, 25 and 27 shall be distinctively marked
of hospital as follows:
ships and a) All exterior surfaces shall be white.
small craft b) One or more dark red crosses, as large as possible, shall be painted
and displayed on each side of the hull and on the horizontal surfaces,

[Source edition page 79]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 75
so placed as to afford the greatest possible visibility from the sea and
from the air.
All hospital ships shall make themselves known by hoisting their national flag
and further, if they belong to a neutral state, the flag of the Party to the conflict whose direction they have accepted. A white flag with a red cross shall be
flown at the mainmast as high as possible.
Lifeboats of hospital ships, coastal lifeboats and all small craft used by the
Medical Service shall be painted white with dark red crosses prominently displayed and shall, in general, comply with the identification system prescribed
above for hospital ships.
The above-mentioned ships and craft, which may wish to ensure by night and
in times of reduced visibility the protection to which they are entitled, must,
subject to the assent of the Party to the conflict under whose power they are,
take the necessary measures to render their painting and distinctive emblems
sufficiently apparent.
Hospital ships which, in accordance with Article 31, are provisionally detained by the enemy, must haul down the flag of the Party to the conflict in
whose service they are or whose direction they have accepted.
Coastal lifeboats, if they continue to operate with the consent of the Occupying
Power from a base which is occupied, may be allowed, when away from their
base, to continue to fly their own national colours along with a flag carrying a
red cross on a white ground, subject to prior notification to all the Parties to
the conflict concerned.
All the provisions in this Article relating to the red cross shall apply equally to
the other emblems mentioned in Article 41.
Parties to the conflict shall at all times endeavour to conclude mutual agreements, in order to use the most modern methods available to facilitate the
identification of hospital ships.
Article 44
The distinguishing signs referred to in Article 43 can only be used, whether in Limitation
time of peace or war, for indicating or protecting the ships therein mentioned, in the use of
except as may be provided in any other international Convention or by agree- markings
ment between all the Parties to the conflict concerned.
Article 45
The High Contracting Parties shall, if their legislation is not already adequate, Prevention of
take the measures necessary for the prevention and repression, at all times, of misuse
any abuse of the distinctive signs provided for under Article 43.

[Source edition page 80]

76 SECOND CONVENTION
CHAPTER VII
execution of the convention
Article 46
Detailed Each Party to the conflict, acting through its Commanders-in-Chief, shall enexecution. sure the detailed execution of the preceding Articles and provide for unfore-
Unforeseen seen cases, in conformity with the general principles of the present Convention.
cases
Article 47
Prohibition Reprisals against the wounded, sick and shipwrecked persons, the personnel,
of reprisals the vessels or the equipment protected by the Convention are prohibited.
Article 48
Dissemina- The High Contracting Parties undertake, in time of peace as in time of war, to
tion of the disseminate the text of the present Convention as widely as possible in their
Convention respective countries, and, in particular, to include the study thereof in their
programmes of military and, if possible, civil instruction, so that the principles thereof may become known to the entire population, in particular to the
armed fighting forces, the medical personnel and the chaplains.
Article 49
Translations. The High Contracting Parties shall communicate to one another through the
Rules of Swiss Federal Council and, during hostilities, through the Protecting Powers,
application the official translations of the present Convention, as well as the laws and
regulations which they may adopt to ensure the application thereof.
CHAPTER VIII
rePression of abuses and infractions
Article 50
Penal The High Contracting Parties undertake to enact any legislation necessary to
sanctions provide effective penal sanctions for persons committing, or ordering to be
I. General committed, any of the grave breaches of the present Convention defined in
observations the following Article.
Each High Contracting Party shall be under the obligation to search for persons alleged to have committed, or to have ordered to be committed, such
grave breaches, and shall bring such persons, regardless of their nationality,
before its own courts. It may also, if it prefers, and in accordance with the
provisions of its own legislation, hand such persons over for trial to another
High Contracting Party concerned, provided such High Contracting Party
has made out a prima facie case.

[Source edition page 81]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 77
Each High Contracting Party shall take measures necessary for the suppression of all acts contrary to the provisions of the present Convention other
than the grave breaches defined in the following Article.
In all circumstances, the accused persons shall benefit by safeguards of proper trial and defence, which shall not be less favourable than those provided
by Article 105 and those following of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Treatment of Prisoners of War of August 12, 1949.
Article 51
Grave breaches to which the preceding Article relates shall be those involving II. Grave
any of the following acts, if committed against persons or property protected breaches
by the Convention: wilful killing, torture or inhuman treatment, including
biological experiments, wilfully causing great suffering or serious injury to
body or health, and extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not
justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly.
Article 52
No High Contracting Party shall be allowed to absolve itself or any other III. Responsi-
High Contracting Party of any liability incurred by itself or by another High bilities of the
Contracting Party in respect of breaches referred to in the preceding Article. Contracting
Parties
Article 53
At the request of a Party to the conflict, an enquiry shall be instituted, in a Enquiry
manner to be decided between the interested Parties, concerning any alleged procedure
violation of the Convention.
If agreement has not been reached concerning the procedure for the enquiry,
the Parties should agree on the choice of an umpire, who will decide upon the
procedure to be followed.
Once the violation has been established, the Parties to the conflict shall put an
end to it and shall repress it with the least possible delay.
final Provisions
Article 54
The present Convention is established in English and in French. Both texts Languages
are equally authentic.
The Swiss Federal Council shall arrange for official translations of the
Convention to be made in the Russian and Spanish languages.

[Source edition page 82]

78 SECOND CONVENTION
Article 55
Signature The present Convention, which bears the date of this day, is open to signature
until February 12, 1950, in the name of the Powers represented at the Conference which opened at Geneva on April 21, 1949; furthermore, by Powers
not represented at that Conference, but which are parties to the Xth Hague
Convention of October 18, 1907, for the adaptation to Maritime Warfare of
the principles of the Geneva Convention of 1906, or to the Geneva Conventions of 1864, 1906 or 1929 for the Relief of the Wounded and Sick in Armies
in the Field.
Article 56
Ratification The present Convention shall be ratified as soon as possible and the ratifications shall be deposited at Berne.
A record shall be drawn up of the deposit of each instrument of ratification
and certified copies of this record shall be transmitted by the Swiss Federal
Council to all the Powers in whose name the Convention has been signed, or
whose accession has been notified.
Article 57
Coming into The present Convention shall come into force six months after not less than
force two instruments of ratification have been deposited.
Thereafter, it shall come into force for each High Contracting Party six
months after the deposit of the instruments of ratification.
Article 58
Relation to The present Convention replaces the Xth Hague Convention of October 18,
the 1907 1907, for the adaptation to Maritime Warfare of the principles of the Geneva
Convention Convention of 1906, in relations between the High Contracting Parties.
Article 59
Accession From the date of its coming into force, it shall be open to any Power in whose
name the present Convention has not been signed, to accede to this Convention.
Article 60
Notification Accessions shall be notified in writing to the Swiss Federal Council, and shall
of accessions take effect six months after the date on which they are received.
The Swiss Federal Council shall communicate the accessions to all the Powers
in whose name the Convention has been signed, or whose accession has been
notified.

[Source edition page 83]

THE GENEVA CONVENTIONS OF 1949 79
Article 61
The situations provided for in Articles 2 and 3 shall give immediate effect to Immediate
ratifications deposited and accessions notified by the Parties to the conflict effect
before or after the beginning of hostilities or occupation. The Swiss Federal
Council shall communicate by the quickest method any ratifications or accessions received from Parties to the conflict.
Article 62
Each of the High Contracting Parties shall be at liberty to denounce the Denunciation
present Convention.
The denunciation shall be notified in writing to the Swiss Federal Council,
which shall transmit it to the Governments of all the High Contracting Parties.
The denunciation shall take effect one year after the notification thereof has
been made to the Swiss Federal Council. However, a denunciation of which
notification has been made at a time when the denouncing Power is involved
in a conflict shall not take effect until peace has been concluded, and until
after operations connected with the release and repatriation of the persons
protected by the present Convention have been terminated.
The denunciation shall have effect only in respect of the denouncing Power.
It shall in no way impair the obligations which the Parties to the conflict shall
remain bound to fulfil by virtue of the principles of the law of nations, as they
result from the usages established among civilized peoples, from the laws of
humanity and the dictates of the public conscience.
Article 63
The Swiss Federal Council shall register the present Convention with the Sec- Registration
retariat of the United Nations. The Swiss Federal Council shall also inform with
the Secretariat of the United Nations of all ratifications, accessions and de- the United
nunciations received by it with respect to the present Convention. Nations
In witness whereof the undersigned, having deposited their respective
full powers, have signed the present Convention.
Done at Geneva this twelfth day of August 1949, in the English and French
languages. The original shall be deposited in the Archives of the Swiss
Confederation. The Swiss Federal Council shall transmit certified copies
thereof to each of the signatory and acceding States.

[Source edition page 84]

80 SECOND CONVENTION
I
XENNA
edis
esreveR
tnorF
ro
reraeb
fo
erutangiS
eman
eht
rof
devreser
ecapS(
otohP
htob
ro
stnirp-regnfi
yratilim
dna
yrtnuoc
eht
fo
reraeb
fo
)drac
siht
gniussi
ytirohtua
DRAC
YTITNEDI
suoigiler
dna
lacidem
fo
srebmem
rof
secrof
demra
eht
ot dehcatta
lennosrep
aes
ta
desssobmE
pmats
yratilim
fo
.................................................................emanruS
ytirohtua
............................................................seman
tsriF
drac
gniussi
..........................................................htrib
fo
etaD
.......................................................................knaR .......................................................rebmuN
ymrA
eht
yb
detcetorp
si
drac
siht
fo
reraeb
eTh
riaH
seyE
thgieH
fo
noitaroilemA
eht
rof
noitnevnoC
aveneG
dna
kciS
,dednuoW
eht
fo
noitidnoC
eht
aeS
ta
secroF
demrA
fo srebmeM
dekcerwpihS
sa yticapac
sih
ni
,9491
,21
tsuguA
fo
:skram
gnihsiugnitsid
rehtO
................................................................................
draC
fo
rebmuN
eussi
fo
etaD
